---
publish: true
---

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

1

Adversarial Training: A Survey

Mengnan Zhao, Lihe Zhang, Jingwen Ye, Huchuan Lu, Fellow, IEEE,
Baocai Yin, Xinchao Wang, Senior Member, IEEE

4
2
0
2

t
c
O
9
1

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
4
0
5
1
.
0
1
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Adversarial training (AT) refers to integrating ad-
versarial examples — inputs altered with imperceptible per-
turbations that can significantly impact model predictions —
into the training process. Recent studies have demonstrated
the effectiveness of AT in improving the robustness of deep
neural networks against diverse adversarial attacks. However,
a comprehensive overview of these developments is still missing.
This survey addresses this gap by reviewing a broad range of
recent and representative studies. Specifically, we first describe
the implementation procedures and practical applications of AT,
followed by a comprehensive review of AT techniques from three
perspectives: data enhancement, network design, and training
configurations. Lastly, we discuss common challenges in AT and
propose several promising directions for future research.

Index Terms—Adversarial training, data enhancement, net-
work design, training configurations, challenges and directions.

I. INTRODUCTION

Adversarial training (AT) has attracted widespread attention
for its efficacy in enhancing the network robustness against
perturbations [1], [2], which has been successfully applied
in various fields such as medical image segmentation [3],
[4], autonomous driving [5], and anomaly detection [6], [7].
Specifically, AT is typically framed as a min-max optimization
problem. The outer minimization adjusts model weights to
correctly classify both clean and adversarial examples, while
the inner maximization generates adversarial examples by
perturbing clean inputs under the fixed model weights [8].
Depending on the accessibility of fixed models, such as model
parameters and gradients, these adversarial examples can be
crafted by white-box attacks [9] or black-box attacks [10].

In addition to generating adversarial data, both types of
attacks can evaluate the adversarial robustness of trained
models during inference [11]. Researchers also assess models
with their prediction accuracy on clean samples. These eval-
uation metrics are affected by multiple factors such as attack
intensity and model architecture. Based on these factors, we
categorize popular AT approaches from three dimensions: data
enhancement, network design, and training configurations.

Manuscript received 19, October, 2024.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62431004 and 62276046 and by Dalian Science and
Technology Innovation Foundation under Grant 2023JJ12GX015.

Mengnan Zhao and Baocai Yin are with the School of Computer Science
and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. E-
mail: gaoshanxingzhi@163.com, ybc@dlut.edu.cn.

Lihe Zhang and Huchuan Lu are with the School of Information and Com-
munication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024,
China. E-mail: {zhanglihe, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn.

Jingwen Ye and Xinchao Wang are with the School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119077.
E-mail: jingweny@nus.edu.sg, xinchao@nus.edu.sg.

Data Perspective: This aspect focuses on increasing data
diversity through various data augmentation (DE) techniques,
including source DE, generic DE, and adversarial DE.

Source DE primarily employs two strategies: data collection
and data generation. The former typically integrates additional
unlabeled samples into the training set [12], while the latter
incorporates data generated by methods like diffusion models
[13], [14]. Unlike the pre-training augmentation of source
DE, generic DE augments data during training. For instance,
techniques such as Cutout [15] and CutMix [16] modify
local image regions through simple replacement operations.
Data reconstruction approaches, on the other hand, reconstruct
distinct samples from input representations [17].

Furthermore, adversarial DE utilizes various adversarial
attacks to generate adversarial training data. For instance, con-
ventional AT [18] employs multi-step attacks [19], while fast
AT [20] uses single-step attacks [21], [22]. Beyond standard
adversarial attacks, specialized strategies for AT have been
developed, such as filtering out data with low attack levels
[8] or low gradient values [23] by calculating adjacent loss
differences or back-propagated gradient values. Additionally,
incorporating different perturbation initialization methods –
such as random initialization [24], learnable initialization [25],
and prior-guided initialization [26] – along with adjusting
attack intensity [27], [28], can further improve data diversity.
Model Perspective: This aspect describes diverse network

architectures and components used in AT.

AT is applicable to different deep learning architectures,
such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [29], Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) [30], Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) [31], Transformers [32], and diffusion models [33], as
its framework is not limited to specific network designs [24].
Researchers also explore multi-model AT techniques [34],
such as ensemble AT [35], federated AT [36], and robustness
transfer via fine-tuning [37] or knowledge distillation [38].
Moreover, AT performance is highly influenced by various
network components [39], [40], e.g., activation functions [41],
batch normalization layers [42], dropout configurations [43],
network depth [44], and Softmax temperature values [45].

Training Configurations Perspective: In addition to data
enhancement and network design, specifying training config-
urations such as loss functions, labels, and weight settings is
essential for AT, e.g., improving AT stability [46].

Specifically, the loss function should be adjusted according
to the AT task. Popular AT tasks include conventional AT, fast
AT, federated AT, virtual AT, fine-tuned AT, robust distillation,
curriculum AT, and domain AT. Common loss functions used
in these tasks include cross-entropy loss [47], norm-based
feature regularization [48], gradient regularization [49], weight
regularization [50], perceptual loss (LPIPS) [51], Kullback-

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

2

Leibler (KL) divergence [52]. Besides, labels in loss functions
for supervising adversarial examples are often modified, using
techniques like label smoothing [53], label interpolation [54],
and label distillation [55].

Based on the constructed objective function, various weight-
related strategies, including adversarial weight perturbation
[56], random weight perturbation [57], weight standardization
[58], and weight selection [59], are introduced. To optimize
model weights both effectively and efficiently, researchers fur-
ther adjust the Softmax temperature values [60], aggregation
algorithms [61], and learning rate schedules [62], [63].

Additionally, this work provides a detailed analysis of four
major challenges faced when applying AT techniques in real-
world scenarios: catastrophic overfitting, fairness, performance
trade-offs, and time efficiency. For each challenge, we propose
potential research directions.

In summary, this work provides a comprehensive review of
contemporary AT techniques. The main contributions of the
paper are as follows:

• We abstract the key factors of AT approaches and con-

struct a unified algorithmic framework for AT.

• Based on these abstracted factors, we provide a system-
atic taxonomy of AT methods, identifying three main-
stream categories: data enhancement, network design, and
training configurations.

• We discuss critical challenges in AT and introduce

promising directions for future research.

The structure of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II presents the formulations and applications of AT. Section
III, the core of this paper, provides a comprehensive overview
of existing AT methods. Section IV outlines key challenges in
AT and presents potential solutions.

II. ADVERSARIAL TRAINING: EXPRESSION AND
APPLICATION

A. Formulation of AT

Recent AT techniques are commonly formulated as a min-
max optimization issue [19], which minimizes the worst-
case loss within a specified perturbation set for each training
example, expressed as:

E(x,y)∼D

min
θ

(cid:20)

max
δ∈B(x,ϵ)

(cid:21)

ℓ(x + δ, y; θ)

.

(1)

Here, θ denotes the model parameters, and (x, y) repre-
sents training data sampled from the data distribution D.
ℓ(x + δ, y; θ) refers to the loss value (e.g., cross-entropy loss)
calculated with adversarial examples x+δ and their true labels
y. δ means adversarial perturbations that are imperceptible
to humans but significantly degrade model performance. The
allowed perturbation set B(x, ϵ) is defined as:

B(x, ϵ) = {δ | x + δ ∈ [0, 1], ∥δ∥p ≤ ϵ},

where ϵ is the maximum perturbation magnitude. ∥δ∥p quan-
tifies the perturbation size using the p-norm. All pixels are
normalized to the range of [0, 1].

The inner maximization of Eq. (1) aims to identify δ under
fixed parameters θ. One representative method to achieve this

Fig. 1. The adversarial perturbation ϵ · sign(∇xℓ(x, y; θ)) causes the object
‘panda’ to be misclassified as ‘gibbon’.

is the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [21], which is a
single-step adversarial attack and formulated as follows:

δ = ProjB(x,ϵ) (ϵ · sign(∇xℓ(x, y; θ)))

where ProjB(x,ϵ) is the projection operator, ensuring that δ
remains within the allowed perturbation range. The term
sign(·) denotes the sign function. ∇xℓ represents the back-
propagated gradient of the loss ℓ with respect to the input
x. Figure 1 provides an example of FGSM. Furthermore, a
widely-used multi-step maximization technique is Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) [19],

t

(cid:0)x′

ℓ(x′

t, y; θ)(cid:1)(cid:1) ,

x′
t+1 = ProjB(x,ϵ)

t + α · sign (cid:0)∇x′
where x′
t denotes the adversarial example at iteration t. The
initial adversarial example is x′
0 = x + δ0, where δ0 represents
randomly initialized perturbations. α is the step size for each
attack iteration. The outer minimization of Eq. (1) optimizes
θ on generated adversarial examples, typically using gradient-
based methods such as stochastic gradient descent [64].

B. Applications of AT

AT has been successfully applied to various tasks.
◦ Abnormal event detection in videos. To tackle the lack
of abnormal samples in training data, Georgescu et al. [65]
propose an adversarial learning strategy, which generates out-
of-domain pseudo-abnormal samples using autoencoders and
trains binary classifiers to distinguish between normal and
abnormal latent features.

◦ Biomedical image segmentation. By conducting experi-
ments on various eye vasculature segmentation datasets, Ja-
vanmardi et al. [66] demonstrate the effectiveness of AT in
mitigating the impact of inaccurately annotated segmentation
targets on model performance.

◦ Emitter identification. To enhance the discriminability of
radio frequency signals while reducing sensitivity to noise, Xie
et al. [67] design a semi-supervised AT algorithm for emitter
identification based on bispectrum analysis.

◦ Graph embedding learning. This transforms graph ele-
ments into representations, facilitating subsequent graph an-
alytic tasks like node and link prediction. To improve graph
embeddings, Pan et al. [68] enforce latent representations of
adversarial data to align with a prior Gaussian distribution.

◦ Healthcare debiasing. Biases present in healthcare data
collection, stemming from variations in health conditions,
can substantially affect model performance. Yang et al. [69]

“panda”57.7% confidence“nematode”8.2% confidence“gibbon”99.3% confidenceJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

3

propose using AT techniques to mitigate site-specific (hospital)
and demographic (ethnicity) biases in training data.

◦ Human pose estimation (HPE). HPE localizes human
anatomical keypoints and is applicable to various tasks such
as action recognition and video surveillance. To address the
vulnerability of HPE models to data corruptions like blur and
pixelation, Wang et al. [70] optimize the pose estimator on
more challenging samples, which are constructed by mixing
different corrupted images in the generator.

◦ Knowledge tracing. By tracking the understanding degree
of learners to various concepts over time, researchers aim
to predict the future development of learners and identify
areas requiring additional support. Guo et al. [71] introduce
an AT-based knowledge tracing method using an attentive-
LSTM backbone, which enhances generalization performance
and mitigates overfitting on small datasets.

◦ Large language models (LLMs). Pre-trained LLMs like
BERT [72] have shown impressive performance in various
text-related tasks. For improving the adversarial robustness of
these pre-trained LLMs, Liu et al. [73] propose a general AT
approach that regularizes the training objective by applying
perturbations to the embedding space.

◦ Machine reading comprehension. Liu et al. [74] utilize a
pretrained generative model to dynamically generate adversar-
ial examples and refine model parameters for machine reading
comprehension within these adversarial examples.

◦ Malware detection. Lucas et al. [75] develop an efficient
adversarial example generation method and examine the ef-
fectiveness of AT in mitigating various malware attacks.

◦ Multi-modal sentiment analysis. Yuan et al. [76] propose
an AT framework for multi-modal sentiment analysis, address-
ing issues like missing modalities and adversarial vulnerability.
The framework utilizes semantic reconstruction supervision to
learn unified representations for both clean and noisy data.

◦ Price prediction. Stock prices fluctuate continuously over
time. To mitigate overfitting caused by static metrics like
closing prices, Feng et al. [77] apply AT techniques to enhance
the diversity of price curves.

◦ Robotic learning. Lechner et al. [78] identify three key
challenges in applying AT to robotic learning: (1) neural
controllers may become unstable or malfunction during tran-
sitional states, (2) controllers can consistently produce errors
under certain system conditions, and (3) controllers may
exhibit erroneous behavior in specific environments.

◦ Text to speech. Li et al. [79] construct a text-to-speech
AT model that integrates style diffusion, AT, and large speech
language models. They employ texts from LibriTTS [80]
as out-of-distribution samples and transfer knowledge from
speech language model encoders to generative models.

Due to page limitations, we provide an overview of 100
mainstream deep learning tasks and their corresponding AT
techniques in the supplementary material.

III. OVERVIEW OF ADVERSARIAL TRAINING

Algorithm 1: Adversarial Training (AT).
Input: The original dataset D, the data enhancement
technique DE(·), the perturbation initialization
method Init(·), the label modification functions
LMattack(·) and LMAT (·), the adversarial
attack approach Attack(·), the loss functions
ℓattack(·) and ℓAT (·), the victim model
fattack(·; θattack), the Softmax function σ(·)
with the temperature τ , the step size of each
attack iteration α, the perturbation budget ϵ, the
maximum attack step S, the AT model
fAT (·; θAT ), the optimization algorithm OP, the
learning rate schedule lr.

Output: The adversarially trained model fAT (·; θAT ).

1 for t in N do
2

Dde = DE(D);
for (x0, y) in Dde do
δ0 = Init(x0);
yattack = LMattack(y);
δ = Attack(ℓattack(·), fattack(·; θattack),
σ(·; τ ), x0, δ0, yattack, α, ϵ, S);
x′ = x0 + δ;
yAT = LMAT (y);
ℓop = ℓAT (σ(fAT (x′; θAT ); τ ), yAT );
θAT = OP(ℓop, θAT , lr);

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

end

11
12 end

Figure 2 presents a comprehensive overview of advancements
in AT across three dimensions: data enhancement, network
design, and training configurations.

A. Data Perspective

Insufficient training data can impact AT performance, such
as the trade-off between classification accuracy on clean and
adversarial examples [81]. Hence, researchers introduce var-
ious data enhancement (DE) techniques, primarily including
source DE, generic DE and adversarial DE.

1) Source DE: Source DE refers to expanding the dataset

before training begins.

◦ Extra data collection. Raghunathan et.al [12] augment
the training set with additional unlabeled data. Gowal et
al. [82] indicate that employing a 3:7 ratio of unlabeled to
labeled data enhances adversarial robustness. Wallace et al.
[83] demonstrate that multiple rounds of dynamic adversarial
data collection can improve AT performance.

◦ Extra data generation. Collecting large datasets is time-
consuming and expensive. Consequently, Gowal et al. [84]
utilize generative models, such as Denoising Diffusion Proba-
bilistic Models (DDPM) [85], to generate extra training data.
Additionally, Wang et al. [86] show that leveraging improved
diffusion models [87] can further augment AT performance.

2) Generic DE: After constructing the source dataset, vari-

This section provides a comprehensive review of AT tech-
niques. Instead of focusing on specific approaches, Algorithm
1 summarizes the general procedures for AT. Furthermore,

ous generic DE techniques are applied during training.

◦ Simple replacement operation. This category typically
generates variants of the input by applying straightforward

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

4

Fig. 2. A comprehensive overview of adversarial training.

operations. For instance, Cutout [15] sets pixel values of
randomly selected image regions to zero, while Rand-Erasing
[88] replaces selected pixel values with either the mean pixel
value or a random value. CutMix [16] replaces deleted image
regions with corresponding regions from another image and
adjusts the label according to the area ratio of the two
images. CropShift [89] randomly crops an image and fills the
remaining area with zeros. MixUp [90] overlays two images
at each pixel based on a pre-defined ratio and assigns labels
using this ratio. AutoAugment [91] introduces a search algo-
rithm to dynamically determine the optimal data augmentation
strategy. RandAugment [92] significantly simplifies the search

complexity of data augmentation policies in AutoAugment.
Additionally, texture-debiased augmentation [93] applies color
distortion and a less aggressive random cropping strategy to
reduce the model bias towards image textures.

◦ Data reconstruction. Researchers also utilize advanced
generative techniques to reconstruct training data. For exam-
ple, Akc¸ay et al. [94] adopt an encoder-decoder framework
to project inputs into a low-dimensional latent space before
reconstructing them. Zuo et al. [95] reconstruct inputs by
inpainting their masked regions. Mao et al. [96] utilize Vector
Generative Adversarial Network (VQGAN) [17] to generate
adversarial inputs, i.e., calculating the worst-case perturbations
for samples reconstructed from discrete representations.

Adversarial Training (AT)Training ConfigurationsLoss Functions (LFs)LFs in Conventional ATDong et al. [194] (CVPR-2023)Kireev et al. [193] (UAI-2022)LFs in Fast ATZhao et al. [8] (ICCV-2023)Pan et al. [20] (AAAI-2024)Zhao et al. [199] (ECCV-2024)Jia et al. [266] (TIFS-2024)LFs in Federated ATZizzo et al. [207] (NIPS-2020)Chen et al. [209] (NIPS-2022)Zhang et al. [210] (AAAI-2023)LFs in Virtual ATMiyato et al. [211] (TPAMI-2018)Osada et al. [214] (ECCV-2020)LFs in Finetuned ATLi et al. [218] (TPAMI-2017)Zhu et al. [219] (ICCV-2023)LFs in Robust DistillationHam et al. [38] (NIPS-2024)Goldblum et al. [224] (AAAI-2020)LFs in Curriculum ATKinfu et al. [18] (CVPR-2022)LFs in Domain AT Rangwani et al. [53] (ICML-2022)Balance Multiple Loss TermsTong et al. [48] (AAAI-2024)Label ModificationChen et al. [231] (TCSS-2020)Li et al. [232] (CVPR-2024)Prediction ModificationStuzu et al. [235] (ICML-2020)Zhou et al. [234] (ICML-2022)Weight-related SettingsAdversarial Weight PerturbationWu et al. [56] (NIPS-2020)Xing et al. [236] (NIPS-2021)Sankaranarayanan et al. [237] (AAAI-2018)Random Weight PerturbationHendrycks et al. [57] (ICCV-2021)Jin et al. [240] (CVPR-2023)Weight StandardizationPang et al. [58] (NIPS-2020)Weight SelectionLi et al. [59] (CVPR-2022)Croce et al. [242] (CVPR-2023)Softmax VariantsTian et al. [243] (SIGKDD-2021)Hou et al. [45] (AAAI-2023)Wang et al. [60] (AAAI-2024)Optimization AlgorithmsCommon OptimizersDuchi et al. [244] (JMLR-2011)Kingma et al. [246] (Arxiv-2014)AT-specified OptimizersZhang et al. [247] (ICML-2022)Jin et al. [250] (CVPR-2022)Learning Rate SchedulesHe et al. [202] (CVPR-2016)Smith et al. [63] (WACV-2017)Szegedy et al. [252] (AAAI-2017)ChallegesCatastrophic OverfittingTsiligkaridis et al. [255] (CVPR-2022)Huang et al. [23] (TIP-2023)He et al. [256] (CVPR-2023)FairnessXu et al. [44] (ICML-2021)Li et al. [257] (AAAI-2023)Sun et al. [258] (AAAI-2023)Performance Trade-offWang et al. [260] (NIPS-2020)Mehrabi et al. [261] (ICML-2021)Ge et al. [262] (ICCV-2023)Time-EfficiencyZheng et al. [264] (CVPR-2020)Rocamora et.al [265] (Arxiv-2024)Jia et al. [266] (TIFS-2024)Network DesignNetwork StructureVision-basedMo et al. [159] (NIPS-2022)Singh et al. [40] (NIPS-2024)Language-basedFeng et al. [167] (TKDE-2019)Ziegler et al. [169] (NIPS-2022)Cross-modalGan et al. [172] (NIPS-2020)Deng et al. [34] (NIPS-2024)Li et al. [173] (CVPR-2024)Multi-modelVivek et al. [177] (ECCV-2018)Liu et al. [35] (TIFS-2022)Network ComponentsActivation FunctionSingla et al. [39] (ICCV-2021)Batch NormalizationAddepalli et al. [183] (NIPS-2022)Wang et al. [185] (ICML-2022)Liu et al. [184] (CVPR-2023)DropoutVivek et al. [187] (CVPR-2020)Wu et al. [186] (ECCV-2022)Other ComponentsHuang et al. [188] (CVPR-2023)Data Enhancement (DE)Source DEExtra Data CollectionGowal et al. [80](Arxiv-2020)Wallace et al. [81] (ACL-2022)Extra Data GenerationGowal et al. [82] (NIPS-2021)Wang et al. [84] (ICML-2023)Generic DESimple Replacement OperationZhong et al. [86] (AAAI-2020)Li et al. [87] (Arxiv-2023)Data ReconstructionZuo et al. [93] (AAAI-2023)Mao et al. [94] (NIPS-2022)Feature-Level EnhancementSong et al. [95] (Arxiv-2019)Poursaeed et al. [96] (ICCV-2021)Adversarial DEPerturbation InitializationJia et al. [98] (TIP-2022)Jia et al. [99] (TPAMI-2024)Various Adversarial AttacksTesting AttacksCroce et al. [106] (ICML-2020)Liu et al. [108] (CVPR-2022)Delusive AttacksMarchant et al. [109] (AAAI-2022)Zhao et al. [112] (TIFS-2022)Ensemble AttacksCai et al. [114] (CVPR-2023)Chen et al. [115] (CVPR-2023)Text AttacksLiu et al. [117] (AAAI-2023)Peng et al. [118] (TDSC-2024)AT for Defending Various AttacksAT for Testing AttacksRuan et al. [125] (ICCV-2023)Gosch et al. [124] (NIPS-2024)AT for Delusive AttacksTao et al. [129] (NIPS-2022)Yu et al. [131] (SIGKDD-2022)AT for Ensemble AttacksDong et al. [132] (NIPS-2020)Hsiung et al. [133] (CVPR-2023)AT for Text AttacksWang et al. [135] (ICML-2019)Zhao et al. [138] (EMNLP-2023)Attack Intensity AdjustmentSmall PerturbationKim et al. [140] (AAAI-2021)Shi et al.  [145] (AAAI-2024)Large PerturbationGong et al. [147] (CVPR-2021)Liang et al. [148] (NIPS-2022)Learnable PerturbationXiong et al. [150] (ECCV-2020)Ye et al. [151] (TNNLS-2021)Adversarial Ratiao AdjustmentDolatabadi et al. [153] (ECCV-2022)JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

5

◦ Feature-level enhancement. Unlike the above input-level
enhancement, feature-level enhancement directly enhances
feature diversity. For instance, Song et al. [97] split inputs
into multiple patches, perform row-wise and column-wise
shuffling, and extract features that ensure prediction consis-
tency before and after shuffling. Poursaeed et al. [98] employ
generative models with decoupled latent spaces, such as Style-
GAN [99], to generate latent representations with different
levels of variation — low, medium, and high – on which
adversarial augmentation techniques are applied.

3) Adversarial DE: Adversarial DE forms the foundation
of AT techniques, focusing on designing various adversarial
attacks to generate adversarial examples.

◦ Perturbation Initialization. Before applying attacks, in-
corporating initial perturbations to clean inputs can signif-
icantly improve the diversity of adversarial perturbations.
For instance, FGSM-AT utilizes uniformly random noise as
initial perturbations [21]. Jia et al. [100] propose a two-step
perturbation initialization process, namely, refining the pertur-
bations generated by FGSM with an initialization generator.
Furthermore, they [26], [101] employ three types of initial
perturbations to compute subsequent adversarial perturbations:
perturbations from previous batches, perturbations from previ-
ous epochs, and perturbations based on momentum statistics.
The adversarial attack in AT using the first type of initial
perturbations is formulated as

δb+1 = δb + α · sign (∇δb ℓ(xb+1 + δb, y; θ)) ,

where δb and δb+1 are adversarial perturbations for inputs xb
and xb+1, respectively. Similarly, for the second initialization
type, the attack is expressed as

δe+1 = δe + α · sign (∇δe ℓ(x + δe, y; θ)) ,

where δe and δe+1 represent adversarial perturbations for the
same input at epochs e and e + 1, respectively. Additionally,
the adversarial attack using momentum-based perturbation
initialization is implemented as

g = sign(∇ηeℓ(x + ηe, y; θ)),

ge+1 = µ · ge + g,

δe+1 = ProjB(x,ϵ)(ηe + α · g),

ηe+1 = ProjB(x,ϵ)(ηe + α · sign(ge+1)),

where g denotes the signed gradient, ηe represents the initial
perturbation for epoch e+1, ge+1 means the gradient momen-
tum, µ signifies the decay factor, and δe+1 is the generated
adversarial perturbation.

◦ Various adversarial attacks. After generating the initial
adversarial perturbations, we illustrate several types of adver-
sarial attacks that further refine these perturbations.

Testing attacks. Testing attacks are widely employed to as-
sess the robustness of pre-trained models during the inference
stage, including both white-box and black-box attacks. White-
box attacks, such as FGSM and PGD, assume that attackers
can access the model architecture, parameters, and gradi-
ents. Similar to PGD, the basic iterative method [9] applies
FGSM iteratively with a small perturbation stride to increase

attack effectiveness. The momentum iterative FGSM [102]
incorporates momentum statistics to boost attack efficiency.
Additionally, DeepFool [103] computes minimal perturbations
required to mislead pretrained models, while the Jacobian-
based saliency map attack [104] leverages the Jacobian matrix
to identify and modify input features that significantly affect
model outputs. In contrast to these gradient-based attacks,
the C&W attack [105] optimizes adversarial perturbations by
minimizing various norm functions. The universal attack [106]
learns an universal adversarial perturbation for multiple inputs.
Different from white-box attacks, black-box attacks rely
solely on input-output queries to produce adversarial exam-
ples. For instance, Square Attack [10] progressively increases
the perturbation degree until the perturbed sample successfully
misleads the target model. Fast Adaptive Boundary attack
(FAB) [107] introduces a search strategy that maintains ad-
versarial effectiveness while reducing the perturbation degree.
Furthermore, AutoAttack [108] integrates both white-box
and black-box attacks, incorporating PGD variants—APGD-
CE and APGD-T [108]—along with FAB and Square Attack
to address challenges such as suboptimal attack steps and
objective functions. Besides, adaptive attacks tailor their con-
figurations to evade specific defense mechanisms [109], [110].
Delusive attacks. Unlike testing attacks that deceive well-
trained models during inference, delusive attacks [111], [112]
compromise the reliability and availability of models during
training. Zhe et al. [113] introduce a parameter matching avail-
ability attack that significantly disrupts the training process by
perturbing only partial training data. To protect commercially
valuable data in data-sharing scenarios, Zhao et al. [114]
propose a double-stream erasable attack, which introduces
erasable perturbations into the training data, thereby reducing
data availability. Additionally, the clean-label poisoning avail-
ability attack [115] uses a two-phase GAN and a triplet loss
to generate poisoned samples. These samples appear realistic
to humans but successfully evade the defenses that employ
singular value decomposition.

Ensemble attacks. Cai et al. [116] demonstrate that a care-
fully designed ensemble method can realize effective attacks
against multiple victim models. Specifically, they show that
normalizing individual model weights before ensembling is
critical for the success of black-box attacks, and further
improvement can be achieved by adjusting ensemble weights
based on the victim models. To improve the intrinsic transfer-
ability of adversarial examples, Chen et al. [117] propose an
adaptive ensemble attack that dynamically adjusts the fusion
of model outputs by monitoring the discrepancy ratio of their
contributions to the adversarial objective.

Text attacks. Jha et al. [118] present CodeAttack to generate
the black-box adversarial code, revealing the vulnerabilities
of pre-trained programming language models to code-specific
adversarial perturbations. Liu et al. [119] propose SSPAttack, a
hard-label textual adversarial method that effectively generates
adversarial examples with minimal alterations during the word
substitution process. Likewise, TextCheater [120] employs an
adaptive semantic preservation optimization technique based
on bigram and unigram structures, aiming to reduce word
changes required for inducing misclassification.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

6

◦ AT for defending against various adversarial attacks.
AT for testing attacks. AT can defend against both standard
attacks, such as PGD and AutoAttack, and specialized attacks
across various tasks. For improving the model robustness
against standard attacks, Dong et al. [121] replace convolu-
tion parameters with randomly sampled mapping parameters,
which are varied during the attack and inference processes.
Araujo et al. [122] demonstrate that AT with random noise
embedding can resist adversarial attacks constrained by ℓ∞-
norm or ℓ2-norm functions. Jiang et al. [123] further show
that AT can defend against ℓ1-bounded attacks by mapping
perturbed samples back to the ℓ1 boundary. Metzen et al.
[124] combine meta-learning with AT to enhance the model
robustness against generic patch attacks.

For defending task-specific adversarial attacks like discrete
attacks, Ivgi et al. [125] introduce discrete AT, which lever-
ages symbolic perturbations such as synonym replacements
designed for linguistic inputs. Gosch et al. [126] show that
AT effectively mitigates adversarial structural perturbations.
Ruan et al. [127] propose a viewpoint-invariant AT, where
viewpoint transformations are treated as adversarial attacks.
Specifically, the inner maximization learns a Gaussian mixture
distribution to generate diverse adversarial viewpoints, while
the outer minimization trains a viewpoint-invariant classifier
against the worst-case viewpoint distribution. Gao et al. [128]
investigate the effectiveness of AT in countering backdoor
attacks, showing that models trained with spatial adversarial
examples can defend against patch-based backdoor attacks.
They also indicate that a hybrid AT strategy can improve ro-
bustness against various backdoor attacks. Additionally, Zhang
et al. [129] identify a limitation of AT: it primarily adapts
to the training distribution and may not effectively improve
robustness on samples that deviate from this distribution.

AT for delusive attacks. To defend against delusive attacks,
Tao et al. [130] minimize adversarial risk within an ∞-
Wasserstein ball, which can reduce the reliance of adversari-
ally trained models on non-robust features. They [131] further
reveal that AT with a defense budget of ϵ is insufficient to
guarantee robustness against ϵ-bounded delusive attacks, and
propose increasing the perturbation budget in AT. Yu et al.
[132] propose a coded Merkle tree as a hash accumulator
to provide a constant-cost protection against data availability
attacks. They [133] also show that targeted adversarial per-
turbations are almost linearly separable and thus can serve as
shortcuts for delusive attacks in AT.

AT for ensemble attacks. Conventional AT methods gener-
ally concentrate on a single perturbation type, such as adver-
sarial perturbations constrained by a specific norm function
(ℓ0, ℓ1, ℓ2, or ℓ∞). To address this limitation, Tramer et al.
[11] propose an affine attack that linearly interpolates across
various perturbation types. Furthermore, adversarial distribu-
tional training [134] designs diverse perturbation distribution
functions, from which adversarial examples are sampled.
Compositional AT [135] combines multiple perturbation types,
including semantic perturbations (e.g., hue, saturation, con-
trast, brightness) and perturbations in ℓp-norm space. Pyramid-
AT [43] generates multi-scale adversarial perturbations and
aligns the outputs of dropout layers for clean and adversarial

examples to enhance AT performance. Weng et al. [136] focus
on non-target classes to solve the dominant bias issue, and
employ an AT framework that self-adjusts ensemble model
weights to boost the transferability.

AT for text-related attacks. Unlike continuous visual pixels,
text is discrete, prompting researchers to apply adversarial
perturbations to text embeddings [137]. Specifically, for graph
networks like DeepWalk [138], Dai et al. [139] generate
negative graphs based on node dependencies and modify graph
embeddings with adversarial attacks. To reduce the discrep-
ancy between generated adversarial text examples and the text
encoder, Zhao et al. [140] employ a discriminator to refine
text embedding layers and a generator to yield adversarial
examples for masked texts.

◦ Attack Intensity Adjustment. Under the same attack, ad-
justing the attack intensity can greatly affect AT performance.
AT with small perturbation degree. Liu et al. [141] observe
that large adversarial budgets during training can hinder the
escape from suboptimal perturbation initialization. To address
this, they propose a periodic adversarial scheduling strategy
that dynamically adjusts the perturbation budget, similar to
learning rate warmup. To enhance the prediction performance
of adversarially trained models on clean samples, Kim et al.
[142] verify multiple perturbation budgets in each attack iter-
ation, selecting the smallest budget that successfully misleads
the target model. Yang et al. [143] reduce the perturbation bud-
get when adversarial examples excessively cross the decision
boundary. Friendly AT [144] terminates the attack iteration
early to prevent generating overly strong perturbations. Fur-
thermore, Wang et al. [145] indicate that using high-quality
adversarial examples early in AT can degrade adversarial
robustness. Shaeiri et al. [146] first train models with small
perturbations, followed by fine-tuning models on larger ones.
Curriculum AT [147] gradually increases the hardness of
adversarial examples, which are sampled from time-varying
distributions using a series prediction framework. Hybrid AT
[148] starts with FGSM and shifts to stronger attacks like PGD
to mitigate catastrophic overfitting.

AT with large perturbation degree. Conversely, Gong et al.
[149] propose MaxUp to enhance adversarial generalization by
performing the outer minimization on the worst-case adversar-
ial examples. Specifically, they generate multiple adversarial
examples for each input and select the most aggressive one.
Xu et al. [28] propose a parameterized automatic attacker to
search for optimal adversarial perturbations. Liang et al. [150]
estimate the worst-case reward for the reinforcement learning
policy using ℓp-bounded attacks. De et al. [151] show that
using stronger adversarial perturbations, such as removing the
clipping operation, can mitigate catastrophic overfitting.

AT with learnable perturbation degree. Xiong et al. [152]
design an optimizer with recurrent neural networks to predict
adaptive update directions and hyperparameters for the inner
maximization. Jia et al. [25] introduce a learnable attack
strategy that dynamically adjusts hyperparameters such as the
number of attack iterations, the maximum perturbation size,
and the attack stride. Ye et al. [153] introduce the Amata
annealing mechanism, which gradually increases the number
of attack steps in inner maximization.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

7

TABLE I
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT MODELS ON IMAGENET-1K. VIT-H/14 AND VIT-G/14 ADDITIONALLY INCORPORATE THE TRAINING DATA
FROM DATACOMP-1B [162]. ℓ∞, ℓ2, ℓ1 ARE ADVERSARIAL PERTURBATION METRICS.

Model

Pre-trained

Epochs

PGD Steps

Params (M)

Clean

ResNet-50 [163]
Wide-ResNet-50-2 [156]
ViT-S [163]
XCiT-S12 [164]
ConvNeXt-T [164]
RobArch-L [165]
ViT-B/16 [166]
ConvNeXT-B [167]
Swin-B [167]
ConvNeXT-B+ConvStem [40]
ConvNeXT-L+ConvStem [40]
ConvNeXT-L [167]
Swin-L [167]
ViT-H/14 [168]
ViT-g/14 [168]

✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗

100
100
100
110
110
100
300
50
300
50
250
-
-
200
200

1
3
1
1
1
3
2
2
3
2
3
3
3
2/3
2/3

25
68.9
22.1
26
28.6
104
87
89
88
89
198
198
197
304
1013

67.4
68.8
66.6
72.3
71.6
73.5
76.6
76.0
76.2
75.2
78.2
78.0
78.9
83.9
83.9

ℓ∞

35.5
38.1
36.6
41.8
44.4
48.9
53.5
55.8
56.2
56.3
59.4
58.5
59.6
69.8
71.0

ℓ2

18.2
22.1
41.4
46.2
45.3
39.5
-
44.7
47.9
49.4
56.2
-
-
69.8
70.4

ℓ1

3.90
4.48
21.8
22.7
21.8
14.7
-
21.2
23.9
23.6
33.8
-
-
46.0
46.7

Adversarial ratio adjustment. Yoo et al. [154] generate
adversarial examples at each training epoch and randomly
replace a certain percentage of clean examples with these
adversarial examples. Dolatabadi et al. [155] also argue that
AT does not require calculating adversarial perturbations for
every input. They employ a greedy algorithm to select a
training subset for perturbation, where the weighted gradients
of this subset can approximate the gradient statistics of the
entire training dataset.

B. Model Perspective

AT does not prescribe a specific network architecture. This
subsection mainly describes AT methods that explore various
network structures and components.

1) Network Structures:
◦ Vision-based. Salman et al. [156] demonstrate that CNNs
and Transformers exhibit comparable adversarial robustness
under identical conditions. Singh et al. [40] perform com-
parative experiments between ConvNeXts [157] and Vision
Transformers (ViTs) [158] on the large-scale ImageNet dataset
[159]. They observe that replacing the PatchStem with Con-
vStem [160] significantly improves the adversarial robustness
of both networks. Additionally, the ConvNeXt with ConvStem
performs the highest robustness against ℓ∞-bounded threats,
while the ViT with ConvStem excels in robust generalization
to unseen models. Mo et al. [161] highlight the critical role of
pre-training for ViTs in AT. They also show that employing the
SGD optimizer and extending the number of training epochs
can further enhance AT performance.

◦ Language-based. Feng et al. [169] introduce Graph AT
to improve the robustness and generalization of GNNs, which
leverages sample relationships to construct adversarial pertur-
bations. Morris et al. [170] develop a natural language pro-
cessing framework that incorporates text adversarial attacks,
data augmentation, and AT. Ziegler et al. [171] indicate that
AT techniques mitigate the risk of catastrophic failures in
generative language models, leading to high-quality comple-
tions for given prompts. In text classification, Pan et al. [172]
enhance transformer-based encoders by generating adversarial
perturbations for the word embedding matrix and performing

contrastive learning on both clean and adversarial examples.
Chen et al. [173] propose a variational word mask network
to interpret the robustness brought by AT. They find that AT
helps identify important words and resolve feature mismatches
between clean and adversarial example pairs.

◦ Cross-modal. Gan et al. [174] introduce AT into the
large-scale visual and language representation learning task,
implementing AT individually in the embedding space of each
modality. Li et al. [175] improve the robustness of vision-
language models through adversarial textual prompt learning.
Wu et al. [176] propose a cross-modal retrieval method that
aligns data from different modalities through augmented AT.
They integrate semantic information from the label space
into the AT process by sampling semantically relevant and
irrelevant source-target pairs. CMLA [177] introduces simi-
larity regularization constraints for both inter-modal and intra-
modal during adversarial learning, increasing the difficulty of
cross-modal adversarial example generation. Sheng et al. [178]
present a self-supervised adversarial
learning approach for
lip reading, utilizing an adversarial dual contrastive learning
technique to learn speech-relevant visual representations.

◦ Multi-model. Vivek et al. [179] point out that current AT
methods focus on evaluating optimal models, overlooking the
behavior of intermediate models. To address this, they propose
periodically saving intermediate models during training and as-
sessing the adversarial robustness of each saved model. Rebuffi
et al. [166] demonstrate that separating trainable parameters
for classifying clean and adversarial examples can significantly
reduce the performance trade-off between the two. Liu et al.
[35] introduce a collaborative AT approach, in which multiple
models are jointly trained to share adversarial knowledge,
thereby enhancing the adversarial robustness of each model.
Additional multi-model AT methods, such as robust fine-
tuning and robust distillation techniques, are discussed in the
Loss Function section.

Table I shows the performance comparison of different

models on the Imagenet dataset.

2) Network Components:
◦ Activation functions. Xie et al. [41] enhance AT perfor-
mance by replacing the ReLU activation with smoother alter-

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

8

natives such as Softplus [180], SiLU [181], GELU [182], and
ELU [183]. Similarly, Singla et al. [39] argue that activation
functions like SiLU and LeakyReLU improve model robust-
ness by improving gradient stability. They also demonstrate
the effectiveness of these activation functions in mitigating
catastrophic overfitting. The formulations of popular activation
functions in AT are as follows:

- Rectified Linear Unit (RELU):

ReLU(x) = max(0, x).

- Leaky Rectified Linear Unit (LeakyReLU):

LeakyReLU(x) = max(αx, x).

- Smooth ReLU (Softplus),

Softplus(x) = log(1 + exp(x)).

- Sigmoid Linear Unit (SiLU):

SiLU(x) =

x
1 + exp(−x)

.

- Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU):

1 + erf

(cid:19)(cid:21)

,

(cid:18) x
√
2

GELU(x) = x ·

erf(x) =

2
√
π

(cid:20)

1
2
(cid:90) x

0

robustness. They propose RobustResBlock and RobustScaling
to enhance network robustness by adjusting block structures
and scaling strategies, respectively.

C. Training Configurations Perspective

This subsection further investigates the influence of various
training configurations, such as loss functions, labels, and
optimization algorithms, on AT performance.

1) Loss Functions:
◦ Loss functions in conventional AT. Conventional AT meth-
ods [191], [192] such as PGD-AT, are known for their stability
and effectiveness in improving model robustness, requiring
multiple gradient descent steps to yield adversarial data.

Specifically,

the inner maximization often employs the
cross-entropy loss ℓce. Regarding the outer minimization,
TRADES [191] incorporates the KL divergence,

min
θ

ℓTRADES = ℓce(x, y; θ) + β · KL(f (x + δ; θ)∥f (x; θ)),

where x means clean samples. β controls the performance
trade-off between clean and adversarial examples. f (·; θ) de-
notes the trained model with weights θ. Nuclear AT [193]
utilizes the nuclear norm function ∥ · ∥∗ to constrain the
prediction differences between the two types of examples,

exp(−t2)dt.

min
θ

[ℓce(x, y; θ) + ∥f (x + δ; θ) − f (x; θ)∥∗],

- Exponential Linear Unit (ELU):

ELU(x) =

(cid:40)

x
β · (exp(x) − 1)

if x ≥ 0
if x < 0

where the default values of the hyperparameters α and β are
set to 0.01 and 1, respectively.

◦ Batch Normalization (BN). Based on the clean-adversarial
domain hypothesis, Xie et al. [184] demonstrate that using
separate BN layers for clean and adversarial examples effec-
tively reduces the performance trade-off. Addepalli et al. [185]
extend this approach by introducing a joint AT method with
diversity augmentation, also utilizing distinct BN layers for
clean and adversarial examples. Liu et al. [186] design a dual-
branch architecture with distinct BN layers: the first BN layer
leverages statistics from the pre-training dataset, while the
second BN layer utilizes statistics from each minibatch of the
target dataset. Adversarial examples are crafted for the second
branch, and both branches are optimized jointly. Wang et al.
[187] attribute the performance degradation of adversarially
trained models on clean samples to the difficulty that BN
layers face in handling mixed data distributions. To address
this, they propose a normalizer-free robust training method.

◦ Dropout strategy. Wu et al. [188] propose an attention-
guided dropout strategy that selectively masks partial network
embeddings during training. Vivek et al. [189] introduce a
dropout scheduling technique, where dropout layers are ap-
plied after each network layer, with the dropout rate gradually
decreasing as training progresses.

◦ Other components. Huang et al. [190] explore the impact
of various architectural elements in residual networks, such
as topology, network depth, and channel width, on adversarial

Cui et al. [194] propose a learnable boundary-guided AT,
which employs cross-entropy and regularization losses to su-
pervise the model weights for classifying clean and adversarial
examples, respectively,

min
θclean,θAT

[ℓce(x, y; θclean) + ∥f (x + δ; θAT ) − f (x; θclean)∥p].

RLAT [195] replaces the KL divergence in ℓTRADES with
LPIPS [51] to perceive image patch similarity,

LPIPS(x, x + δ) =

L
(cid:88)

αl · ∥fl(x + δ) − fl(x)∥2
2,

l=1
where ∥fl(x + δ) − fl(x)∥2
2 denotes the squared Euclidean
distance between the extracted features for x + δ and x at the
layer l. αl represents the layer weighting factor.

The above methods often regularize the model predictions
for x + δ and x, which can affect AT performance when clean
examples are misclassified. To tackle this, Dong et al. [196]
craft adversarial perturbations δclean for clean samples, ensur-
ing all crafted samples x + δclean can be correctly classified.
Then, they regularize the predictions for x + δ and x + δclean,

min
θ

[ℓce(x, y; θ) + ∥f (x + δ; θ) − f (x + δclean; θ)∥p].

Fan et al. [197] combine adversarial and abstraction losses to
achieve provably robust AT.

In addition to using ℓce in the inner maximization, Zhang et
al. [198] maximize the feature distribution distance between
clean and adversarial examples based on optimal transport
metrics. Zou et al. [199] leverage AT to develop robust clas-
sifiers against unknown label noise. They investigate various
loss functions in the inner maximization, such as binary cross-
entropy and non-convex S-shaped losses, and indicate that

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

9

choosing an appropriate loss function can greatly improve
AT performance. Addepalli et al. [200] observe that large
adversarial perturbations may alter the true categories of
inputs. To address this, they introduce distinct constraints for
oracle-invariant and oracle-sensitive samples. These samples
are divided based on whether crafted perturbations modify
human cognition. For oracle-invariant samples, the inner max-
imization is formulated as

max
δ

[ℓce(x + δ, y; θ) − λ · LPIPS(x, x + δ)],

while the outer minimization utilizes ℓTRADES. For oracle-
sensitive samples, the LPIPS term is excluded from the inner
maximization, and the outer minimization is expressed as

min
θ

[ℓhybrid + β · KL(f (x + δ; θ)∥f (x; θ))],

ℓhybrid = α · ℓce(x, y; θ) + (1 − α) · ℓce(x + δ, y; θ).

◦ Loss functions in fast AT. Fast AT, which employs single-
step adversarial attacks like FGSM in the inner maximization,
is time-efficient but prone to catastrophic overfitting [201].

Regarding the outer minimization, FGSM-AT [21] directly
utilizes ℓhybrid. Li et al. [202] further introduce a supplementary
regularization for ℓhybrid to improve adversarial robustness,

(cid:88)

βi ·

(cid:88)

i

j

∥fi,j(x; θ) − fi,j(x + δ; θ)∥p,

where j and i are indices of the feature channels and lay-
ers, respectively. The prior-guided initialization method [26]
introduces a regularization constraint for adversarial examples
x + δ and initially perturbed samples x + δ0,

β · ∥f (x + δ; θ) − f (x + δ0; θ)∥2
2,

where δ0 denotes uniformly sampled random perturbations,
δ0 ∈ U(−ϵ, ϵ). ϵ represents the maximum perturbation value.
The default value of β is set to 10. Besides, Zhao et al.
[8] demonstrate the adversarial vulnerability of exiting AT
methods on large perturbation budgets. To address this, they
select
the maximum activation layer based on the feature
activation differences between x + δ and x + δ0, and restrict
the feature differences at the selected layer [201]:

β · ∥fact-max(x + δ; θ) − fact-max(x + δ0; θ)∥2
2,

where fact-max denotes the maximum feature activation layer.
The default value of β is set to 300. Additionally, they [8]
attribute catastrophic overfitting to convergence anomalies in
specific samples and mitigate it by restricting the convergence
speed of these outliers,

|ℓce(x + δ, y; θ) − µ′

pre|+|ℓce(x, y; θ) − µpre|,

s.t. |ℓce(x, y; θ) − µpre| > γ,

or restricting the convergence speed of abnormal batches,

|µ′

batch − µ′

pre| + |µbatch − µpre|, s.t. |µbatch − µpre| > γ,
pre = E(x,y)∼Dℓce(x + δ, y; θpre) and µpre =
where µ′
E(x,y)∼Dℓce(x, y; θpre). θpre represents the weights in the pre-
| · | calculates the absolute value. γ is the
vious epoch.
convergence stride used for selecting abnormal data.

Unlike these methods that restrict the deviation between
predicted features, GradAlign [49] aligns the back-propagated
gradients for perturbed examples with those for clean samples,

1 − cos (∇x+δ0 ℓce(x + δ0, y; θ), ∇xℓce(x, y; θ)) .

The experimental results of conventional and fast AT tech-
niques with the budget of ϵ = 8/256 are shown in Table II.
Additionally, Table III displays the comparison of different
methods on various perturbation budgets.

◦ Loss functions in federated AT. Federated AT [209]
computes gradients for each local client i individually across
N local samples {xj, yj}N

j=1 as follows:

K
(cid:88)

j=1

∇θiℓce

(cid:0)x′

j, yj; θi

(cid:1) +

N
(cid:88)

j=K+1

∇θiℓce (xj, yj; θi) ,

where K determines the proportion of adversarial examples x′,
which are typically generated by FGSM or PGD. The gradients
from various local models are then aggregated by a central
server to construct a global model.

In federated AT, some local servers may behave maliciously.
To detect such stealthy attacks, Zizzo et al. [210] introduce
certifiable federated AT based on the abstract interpretation
techniques. Given a network f , they verify that the predicted
label for any input within a p-norm ball Bϵ
p of radius ϵ,
centered around x, remains consistent with the true class y:

arg max f (x′; θ) = y, ∀x′ ∈ Bϵ

p(x) = {x′ = x+δ | ∥δ∥p ≤ ϵ}.

Practically, they utilize an abstract element ˆx to represent the
p-norm ball of x:

ˆx = η0 +

M
(cid:88)

i=1

ηi · ϵi.

Here, η0 denotes the central coefficient and ηi is the deviation
from the center, with an associated error symbol ϵi, where
ϵi can be either +1 or -1. M means the number of deviation
points. Federated AT also faces various challenges under non-
independent and identically distributed (non-IID) conditions.
Specifically, to address training instability and decreased clean
classification accuracy, Chen et al. [211] propose calibrated
federated AT that minimizes the following objective:

min
θi

1
ni

ni(cid:88)

j=1

− log σ(f (x′

ij; θi) + log πi),

where σ is the Softmax function, xij is the j-th example of
the i-th client, and πi is a constant computed based on the
local dataset Di. ni denotes the number of examples in Di.
x′
ij represents the adversarial example of xij, generated by

arg max

[−σ(f (xij; θi) + log πi) log σ(f (x′

ij; θi) + log πi)].

x′
ij

To resolve bias and fairness issues, Zhang et al. [212] as-
sign higher weights to samples near the decision boundary
and ensure consistency between local model predictions for
adversarial examples and global model predictions for clean

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

10

TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF AT METHODS ON CIFAR10 [203] AND RESNET [204]. ‘TIME’ REFERS TO THE RUNNING MINUTES ON A 4090 GPU.
THE TOTAL TRAINING DURATION IS 110 EPOCHS, WITH THE LEARNING RATE DECAYING BY A FACTOR OF 0.1 AT THE 100TH AND 105TH EPOCHS.

Method (ϵ = 8/256 )
ORI [204]

PGD-AT [205]

TRADES [191]

Free-AT [206]

LBGAT [194]
OAAT [200]

GAT [207]

NuAT [193]

UIAT[196]

GradAlign [49]

FGSM-RS [24]

FGSM-CKPT [142]

N-FGSM [151]

FGSM-EP [26]

FGSM-MEP [26]

FGSM-PCO [208]

Clean Acc
94.40
82.57
82.99
82.03
81.80
80.64
79.88
81.98
80.24
79.79
80.41
81.58
81.38
85.01
81.27
86.40
72.95
84.24
90.29
90.29
80.48
79.28
80.91
81.72
81.72
82.05
82.05

-
Best
Last
Best
Last
Best
Last
Best
Best
Best
Last
Best
Last
Best
Best
Last
Best
Last
Best
Last
Best
Best
Last
Best
Last
Best
Last

FGSM PGD10

2.13
63.93
64.20
64.28
63.57
57.62
55.4
-
78.54
54.18
53.29
53.96
53.52
-
59.52
0
52.64
0
-
-
-
65.04
73.83
64.71
64.71
65.53
65.53

0
53.19
53.05
54.06
53.89
44.10
42.00
-
-
53.55
52.06
52.90
52.65
54.63
45.49
0
41.40
0
41.96
41.96
-
54.34
40.89
55.13
55.13
56.32
56.32

PGD20
0
52.42
52.14
53.35
53.23
42.99
40.49
57.78
-
53.42
51.76
52.61
52.48
-
43.84
0
40.57
0
39.84
39.84
-
53.52
37.76
54.45
54.45
55.66
55.66

PGD50
0
52.21
51.96
53.16
53.05
42.73
40.18
-
-
49.04
49.07
51.30
50.63
-
43.52
0
40.40
0
39.15
39.15
47.91
53.54
36.05
54.29
54.29
55.67
55.67

C&W APGD

0
48.01
47.51
46.22
46.31
39.88
38.83
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
42.84
0
36.83
0
41.13
41.13
-
45.84
38.46
47.05
47.05
47.12
47.12

0
51.22
50.66
50.66
50.39
42.83
40.37
-
-
47.53
46.56
49.09
48.70
-
43.15
0
39.95
0
-
-
-
47.85
28.41
50.39
50.39
50.05
50.05

Square
-
55.70
55.23
55.83
55.54
48.82
46.03
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40.96
0
44.75
0
-
-
-
52.42
45.29
55.47
55.47
55.59
55.59

AutoAttack
0
48.77
48.23
49.47
49.56
41.17
40.34
53.14
50.88
-
-
-
-
49.11
39.29
0
37.67
0
37.15
37.15
44.81
45.66
25.16
48.23
48.23
48.04
48.04

Time
24

199

241

140

-
-

87

79

-

132

40

58

-

57

57

60

inputs. Given a local model floc and a global model fglo, the
local objective is formulated as:

[ℓce(ρ·floc(x′; θloc), y)+β ·KL(floc(x′; θloc)∥fglo(x; θglo))].

min
θloc
For a mini-batch of samples {xi, yi}m
ρi ∈ ρ is expressed as follows,
(cid:40)

(cid:41)

i=1, the parameter list

where DGAN denotes the set of generated adversarial samples.
ℓu and ℓGAN are loss functions for unlabeled and generated
examples, respectively. The former is defined as:

(cid:34)

K
(cid:88)

−

k=1

exp(fk(x; θ))
k′=1 exp(fk′ (x; θ))

1 + (cid:80)K

log

exp(fk(x; θ))
k′=1 exp(fk′ (x; θ))

1 + (cid:80)K

(cid:35)

,

and the latter is expressed as:

ρi ← 1 −

di
(cid:80)m
j=1 dj

,

log(1 +

K
(cid:88)

k=1

exp(fk(x; θ))).

where di represents the minimum attack step to deceive the
i-th local model.

◦ Loss functions in virtual AT (VAT). VAT is a semi-
supervised AT method. For unsupervised samples, Miyato et
al. [213] utilize their predictions from a pre-trained model as
virtual labels, minimizing the following objective

min
θ

E(x,y)∼DL [− log p(y|x; θ)] + Ex∼DU [ℓvirtual(θ, ˆθ, x, ϵ)],
(2)
where DL and DU represent labeled and unlabeled datasets,
respectively. ℓvirtual is formulated as:

ℓvirtual(θ, ˆθ, x, ϵ) = −

K
(cid:88)

k=1

p(k|x; ˆθ) log p(k|x + δ; θ),

where K is the number of categories. ˆθ denotes the current
estimate of θ. δ = arg maxδ,∥δ∥≤ϵ KL(p(·|x; ˆθ)∥p(·|x + δ; ˆθ)).
For vision-based VAT, Kim et al. [214] employ Bad-GAN
[215] to generate high-quality bad examples and introduce a
supplementary regularization term for Eq. (2),

λ · [Ex∼DU ℓu(x; θ) + Ex∼DGANℓGAN(x; θ)] ,

Osada et al. [216] introduce a latent VAT technique, where
adversarial perturbations are injected into the latent space
based on generative models such as variational autoencoders.

δ = arg max

δ

KL(f (x; θ)∥f (x′; θ)), s.t. ∥δ∥2 ≤ ϵ,

x′ = Dec(Enc(x) + δ).

Regarding language-based VAT, Chen et al. [217] propose
SeqVAT, which effectively integrates VAT with Conditional
Random Fields (CRFs) for constructing sequence labeling
models. The adversarial loss in SeqVAT is formulated as:

min
θ

KL (f (S; w, c, θ) ∥ f (S; w + δw, c + δc, θ)) ,

where f (S; w, c, θ) = (p1, p2, . . . , pk, 1 − (cid:80)k
i=1 pi) repre-
sents the estimated probability distribution over the k-best
label sequences for the given input embeddings w and c.
pi = pcrf(si; w, c, θ) denotes the computed probability by the
CRF model for the i-th label sequence si ∈ S, with i ∈ [1, k].
δw and δc are adversarial perturbations applied to w and c,
respectively. Li et al. [218] propose a token-aware VAT method

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

11

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF AT METHODS ON VARIOUS PERTURBATION LEVELS (8/255, 12/255, 16/255). EXPERIMENTS ARE CONDUCTED ON
CIFAR10 [203] WITH PREACTRESNET18 [204]. THE TOTAL TRAINING DURATION IS 110 EPOCHS, WITH THE LEARNING RATE DECAYING BY A FACTOR
OF 0.1 AT THE 100TH AND 105TH EPOCHS.

-
-
-

Method

Clean Acc

Clean Acc

AutoAttack

ϵ = 8/255
PGD50

ϵ = 16/255
PGD50

AutoAttack Clean Acc

-
-
48.41 ± 0.28

78.52 ± 0.25
65.71 ± 2.48
-

ϵ = 12/255
AutoAttack
PGD50
80.55 ± 0.37 50.67 ± 0.40 46.37 ± 0.76 72.37 ± 0.31 38.60 ± 0.39 33.13 ± 0.28 67.20 ± 0.69 29.34 ± 0.18 21.98 ± 0.30
-
-
-
-
83.49 ± 0.69
-
76.20 ± 1.09 43.74 ± 0.41 40.13 ± 0.39 68.07 ± 0.38 33.14 ± 0.62 27.65 ± 0.38 45.84 ± 19.07 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00
81.60 ± 0.16 47.56 ± 0.16 44.76 ± 0.02 77.52 ± 0.21 27.34 ± 0.09 29.88 ± 0.23 79.65 ± 0.17 6.37 ± 0.23 19.07 ± 0.28
82.98 ± 3.30 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00
81.65 ± 0.16 47.93 ± 0.18 44.19 ± 0.10 81.09 ± 4.67 9.95 ± 16.97 0.00 ± 0.00
82.10 ± 0.78 47.77 ± 0.58 44.66 ± 0.21 74.17 ± 0.55 34.87 ± 1.00 28.63 ± 0.34 60.37 ± 0.95 27.90 ± 1.01 17.46 ± 1.71
83.91 ± 0.21 46.01 ± 0.18 42.88 ± 0.09 66.46 ± 22.8 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 66.54 ± 12.25 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00
80.48 ± 0.21 47.91 ± 0.29 44.81 ± 0.18 71.30 ± 0.12 36.23 ± 0.10 30.56 ± 0.12 62.96 ± 0.74 27.14 ± 1.44 20.59 ± 0.47
83.57 ± 0.06 49.78 ± 0.15 45.28 ± 0.15 74.43 ± 4.59 34.90 ± 2.08 27.50 ± 1.83 82.47 ± 5.85 0.47 ± 0.26 0.00 ± 0.00
-
-

PGD-10 [205]
GAT [207]
GAT+ELLE [220]
DOM-AT[221]
FreeAT [206]
Zerograd [222]
Multigrad [222]
Gradalign [49]
FGSM-RS [24]
N-FGSM [151]
FGSM-MEP [26]
DOM-FGSM [221] 84.52 ± 0.28
84.12 ± 0.29
RS-LAP [223]
80.76 ± 0.15 44.97 ± 0.24
N-LAP [223]
83.83 ± 0.27 46.14 ± 0.02
RS-AAER [224]
80.56 ± 0.35 48.31 ± 0.23
N-AAER [224]
FGSM-PBD [201] 83.38 ± 0.19 50.19 ± 0.09 45.45 ± 0.12 77.39 ± 0.28 37.21 ± 0.33 30.37 ± 0.38 70.69 ± 0.21 27.39 ± 0.15 17.90 ± 0.24

63.73 ± 0.27 19.55 ± 0.18
64.56 ± 1.45 23.87 ± 0.36
61.84 ± 0.43 28.20 ± 0.71

71.91 ± 0.19 30.60 ± 0.27
74.40 ± 0.79 32.17 ± 0.16
71.15 ± 0.18 36.52 ± 0.10

42.53 ± 1.41
43.14 ± 0.45 74.10 ± 0.31

0.54 ± 0.53
13.83 ± 4.63
-

-
15.69 ± 0.28
-

26.04 ± 1.04 64.83 ± 0.29

-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-

-
-

-

-

-

-

for the language understanding task, generating token-level
accumulated perturbations for initialization and using token-
level normalization balls to constrain these perturbations. Lee
et al. [219] present a context-based VAT technique for the
text classification task. This technique preserves contextual
semantics and prevents overfitting to noisy labels based on
the context-driven label smoothing loss.

◦ Loss functions in finetuned AT. Li et al. [225] propose
a lifelong learning strategy that fine-tunes pre-trained models
with training data of the target task while maintaining the
model performance on the source task. This strategy minimizes
the following objective function:

min
θs,θt

[ℓsource(ˆys, ys; θs) + ℓce(xt, yt; θt)] ,

where θs and θt denote the task-specific parameters for the
source and target tasks, respectively. ℓsource is a modified cross-
entropy loss emphasizing small prediction probabilities:

ℓsource(ˆys, ys; θs) = −

C
(cid:88)

i=1

s,i log ˆy′
y′

s,i,

where C is the number of categories. y′
s,i are de-
rived from the ground-truth probability ys,i and the predicted
probability ˆys,i, respectively,

s,i and ˆy′

y′
s,i =

(ys,i)1/T
j(ys,j)1/T

(cid:80)

,

ˆy′
s,i =

(ˆys,i)1/T
j(ˆys,j)1/T

(cid:80)

.

◦ Loss functions in robust distillation. Conventional knowl-
edge distillation methods [227], [228], [229] are commonly
expressed as follows:

min
θ

[λ · ℓce(S(x; θ), y) + (1 − λ) · KL(S(x; θ)∥T (x))],

where λ ∈ [0, 1] controls the regularization strength. T (·) and
S(·; θ) are teacher and student models, respectively.

In addition to inheriting the performance of teacher models
on the original
task, robust distillation [230] requires the
transfer of robust features to student models. Goldblum et al.
[231] implement robust distillation by minimizing

λ · ℓce (Sτ (x; θ), y) + (1 − λ) · τ 2 · KL (Sτ (x + δ; θ)∥Tτ (x)) ,
(3)
where τ is the temperature of Softmax. The adversarial per-
turbations δ are calculated by

δ = arg max
B(x,ϵ)

ℓce (Sτ (x + δ; θ), y) .

Zi et al. [55] produce adversarial perturbations based on soft
labels generated by the teacher model,

δ = arg max
B(x,ϵ)

KL(S(x + δ; θ)∥T (x)).

Maroto et al. [232]) propose the label mixing strategy, replac-
ing ℓce(Sτ (x; θ), y) in Eq. (3) with

ℓce(S(x + δ; θ), β · T (x + δ) + (1 − β) · y),

Here, the default value of T is set to 2. Zhu et al. [226] identify
and refine non-robust key modules, where the robust criticality
of module i is calculated by

where β ∈ [0, 1] controls the mixture degree of distilled and
ground-truth labels. Huang et al. [52] replace ℓce(Sτ (x; θ), y)
in Eq. (3) with KL divergence:

(cid:80)

(x,y)∈D maxδ ℓce(x + δ, y; θ + θ′)
(cid:80)
(x,y)∈D maxδ ℓce(x + δ, y; θ)

,

max
θ′∈Cθ

where θ′ = {0, . . . , 0, θ′
perturbation applied to the module i, and

i, 0, . . . , 0} represents the weight

λ · KL(S(x; θ)∥T (x)) + (1 − λ) · KL(Sτ (x + δ; θ)∥Tτ (x + δ)).

Kuang et al. [233] introduce an information bottleneck dis-
tillation method, replacing one-hot labels with robust prior
information from pre-trained models,

Cθ = {θ′ | ∥θ′∥p ≤ ε · ∥θi∥p} .

λ · ℓce(S(x; θ), T (x)) + (1 − λ) · ℓce(S(x + δ; θ), T (x)).

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

12

◦ Loss functions in curriculum AT. To improve worst-
case robustness on large datasets, Cai et al. [234] propose
curriculum AT, which progressively increases attack intensity
during training. Specifically, after each training epoch, the k-
accuracy is evaluated on a selected validation set V ,

|{(x, y) ∈ V | ∀i ∈ {0, . . . , k}, f (PGDi(x); θ) = y}|†
|V |†

.

Here, | · |† calculates the number of samples, and PGDi(·)
represents a PGD attack with i steps. The attack strength is
increased if the k-accuracy does not improve over the past
10 epochs. Kinfu et al. [18] propose an adaptive method
for distributing perturbation budgets based on the calculated
probability across different attacks,

P (ϵi) =

(cid:80)N

n=1 ℓce(xn + δi
(cid:80)N

n, yn; θ)

,

(cid:80)K

j=1

n, yn; θ)

n=1 ℓce(xn + δj
where δi
n is the perturbation applied to xn constrained by a
budget ϵi. K denotes the number of discrete attack budgets.
◦ Loss functions in domain AT. Domain AT [235] involves
two domains, source and target, aiming to improve general-
ization performance across domains.

To optimize the model weights, Liu et al. [236] simulta-
neously minimize the domain discrimination loss ℓd and the
source domain classification loss ℓc:

ℓd = −

1
ns

ns(cid:88)

i=1

log [D(xs,i)] −

1
nt

nt(cid:88)

i=1

log [1 − D(xt,i)] ,

ℓc =

1
ns

ns(cid:88)

i=1

ℓ(xs,i, y; θ) +

1
nt

nt(cid:88)

i=1

∥f (xt,i; θ) − f (xi; θ)∥p,

where ns and nt denote the number of examples in the source
and target domains, respectively. D(·) represents the domain
discriminator. xs and xt are generated adversarial examples:

xs = x + δs,

xt = x + δt,

δs = δs + α · (∇δsℓd + ∇δsℓc) − γ · ∥δs∥2,

δt = δt + α · ∇δtℓd − γ · ∥δt∥2,

where α and γ are hyper-parameters. Smooth domain AT
[53] alternately updates the discriminator and the adversari-
ally trained model. Specifically, the discriminator weights are
updated by maximizing the domain discrimination loss, while
the adversarial model weights are optimized by minimizing
the task and domain discrimination losses.

◦ Balance Multiple Loss Terms. Researchers also explore
balancing various loss terms [237]. For instance, Wallace et al.
[83] introduce dynamic hyperparameter learning based on the
classification accuracy of clean samples. Tong et al. [48] pro-
pose an epoch-by-epoch label relaxation method that adjusts
regularization hyperparameters according to the classification
confidence of adversarial examples.

2) Label Modification: Wang et al. [192] assign non-zero
random values to the non-target classes in one-hot labels.
Chen et al. [238] employ soft labels generated by a teacher
model for both clean and adversarial examples to distill the
student model. Li et al. [239] propose a self-guided label

refinement method that generates interpolated soft labels for
student models without relying on external teacher models.
Dong et al. [240] attribute robust overfitting in AT to model
memorization of one-hot labels, and address this by using
momentum-based prediction statistics as labels for adversarial
examples. Song et al. [54] construct an adversarial region
based on the initial and final adversarial examples, selecting
adversarial points from this region and assigning soft labels
based on their distance from the original examples.

3) Prediction Modification: Zhou et al. [241] model
the
relationship between adversarial and ground-truth labels using
an instance-dependent transition matrix, and convert adver-
sarial predictions during inference. Stutz et al. [242] propose
confidence-calibrated AT, where low-confidence samples are
excluded from evaluation. Namely, the model is trained to
reduce its prediction confidence as perturbation levels increase.

4) Weight-related Settings:
◦ Adversarial weight perturbation. Wu et al. [56] observe
a positive correlation between robust generalization perfor-
mance and model weight flatness. To enhance this flatness,
they introduce adversarial perturbations to model weights.
Similar approaches [243], [244] propose applying adversarial
perturbations to both inputs and model weights. To reduce
the influence of weight perturbations on model predictions,
Park et al. [245] introduce perturbations only to specific
sensitive feature layers. Lin et al. [223] present adaptive
weight perturbations across layers to hinder the generation of
pseudo-robust shortcuts. To mitigate robust overfitting, Yu et
al. [237] introduce weight perturbations when the classification
loss drops below a pre-defined threshold, while dynamically
adjusting the hyperparameters of different loss components.

◦ Random weight perturbation. DeepAugment [57] applies
random noise to the weights of image-to-image models (e.g.,
super-resolution). Similarly, Jin et al. [246] introduce random
noise into deterministic weights and apply a Taylor expansion
to analyze losses calculated based on perturbed weights.

◦ Weight standardization. To facilitate robust feature learn-
ing during training, Pang et al. [58] present a hypersphere
embedding network that incorporates various normalization
operations, such as feature normalization and weight nor-
malization. Brock et al. [247] introduce a signal propagation
analysis toolset for ResNet, replacing activation normalization
layers with an adapted weight standardization technique.

◦ Model weight selection. Subspace AT [59] leverages
Singular Value Decomposition to determine the most signif-
icant gradients during training. Croce et al. [248] construct
adversarially robust model soups, which are linear combina-
tions of parameters for multiple models, effectively balancing
robustness against different ℓp-norm bounded adversaries.

5) Softmax Variants: To address class-wise imbalances in
adversarial robustness, Tian et al. [249] introduce temperature-
PGD in the inner maximization, which modifies back-
propagated gradients by adjusting the Softmax temperature.
Hou et al. [45] argue that untargeted attacks often adopt the
nearest target as the adversarial direction. To mitigate this, they
adjust the Softmax temperature based on the cosine similarity
between diverse categories. To enhance knowledge transfer
efficiency, Wang et al. [60] present an interactive temperature

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

13

adjustment strategy, starting with a high temperature and grad-
ually reducing it. They also introduce an adaptive generator
that balances performance for clean and adversarial examples
based on the model confidence in adversarial examples.

6) Optimization Algorithms: Various optimization algo-
rithms can be employed to update the model weights in AT.
◦ Common optimizers. Adagrad [250] updates model

weights by accumulating past gradients:

θt+1 = θt −

√

η
Gt + c

· gt,

where θt and gt represent the model parameters and gradients
at the time step t, respectively. η denotes the global learning
rate, while Gt is the sum of previous squared gradients, with
c being a small constant for numerical stability. RMSprop
[251] enhances Adagrad by replacing Gt with an exponentially
decaying average of squared gradients, E[g2]t:

θt+1 = θt −

η
(cid:112)E[g2]t + c

· gt.

Adam [252] combines the strengths of Adagrad and RMSprop
by maintaining exponentially decaying averages of both past
gradients (momentum) and squared gradients (adaptive learn-
ing rates), formulated as follows:

θt+1 = θt −

η · ˆmt
√
ˆvt + c

,

where ˆmt and ˆvt are the bias-corrected estimates of the first
and second gradient moments, respectively.

◦ Optimization algorithms in AT. Zhang et al. [253] uti-
lize a bi-level optimization technique for fast AT methods,
which does not rely on gradient-based approaches or explicit
regularization constraints. Wang et al. [254] accelerate the
optimization process by incorporating the momentum aggrega-
tion strategy. Acuna et al. [255] demonstrate that employing
a gradient descent-based optimizer often limits the transfer
performance in domain AT. They suggest using high-order
ordinary differential equation solvers (e.g., Runge-Kutta) and
provide asymptotic convergence guarantees. Jin et al. [256]
treat model weights as random variables and optimize them
with a second-order statistic technique.

7) Learning Rate Schedules: The learning rate schedule can
impact the stability and effectiveness of AT techniques [26].
Beyond employing a fixed learning rate, Bengio et al. [257]
propose an epoch-decay schedule, in which the learning rate
decreases as training progresses:

ηe =

η0
1 + λ · e

,

where ηe is the learning rate at epoch e, and λ is the decay
rate. Similarly, He et al. [204] introduce a step-decay schedule,
ηs = η0 · γ⌊ s

I ⌋,

where ηs represents the learning rate at training step s, γ
is the decay factor, and I denotes the interval for decaying
the learning rate. Szegedy et al. [258] design an exponential
learning rate schedule, formulated as

ηt = η0 · exp(−λt).

Loshchilov et al. [259] present a cosine annealing approach,

ηt = ηmin +

1
2

(cid:18)

(ηmax − ηmin)

1 + cos

(cid:18) t

Tmax

(cid:19)(cid:19)

π

,

where ηmin and ηmax denote the minimum and maximum
learning rates, respectively, and Tmax is the maximum iteration
number. Smith et al. [63] propose a cyclical learning rate
schedule, defined as:

ηt = ηmin +

1
2

(cid:18)

(ηmax − ηmin)

1 + cos

(cid:18) t mod T
T

π

(cid:19)(cid:19)

.

Here, T denotes the cycle period, and ‘mod’ calculates the
remainder of a division.

IV. CHALLENGES AND POTENTIAL RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

A. Challenges

1) Catastrophic Overfitting: Catastrophic overfitting refers
to the phenomenon where models perform well on training
data but experience a sharp decline in accuracy on unknown
adversarial examples. Kang et al. [27] observe that training
with a single type of adversarial perturbation often leads to
catastrophic overfitting. To mitigate this, they propose lever-
aging diverse perturbations that span the full range of floating-
point values. Golgooni et al. [222] argue that small backprop-
agated gradient values can trigger catastrophic overfitting and
recommend removing small gradient elements. Tsiligkaridis
et al. [260] observe a close relationship between catastrophic
overfitting and small distortions, introducing a dynamic attack
intensity adjustment method based on prior distortion levels.
Huang et al. [23] emphasize that fitting instances with large
gradient norms is prone to catastrophic overfitting and thus
present adaptive AT, where the attack stride is inversely pro-
portional to the instance gradient norm. He et al. [261] explore
catastrophic overfitting from a self-fitting perspective, i.e., the
model overfits to specific adversarial perturbations used during
training and loses its generalization ability to slightly different
perturbations. They further find that catastrophic overfitting
results in significant channel separation.

2) Fairness: Xu et al. [44] observe that robustness im-
provements vary across different model layers and propose
adjusting model weights based on the layer-level robustness.
To improve adversarial robustness for the worst-performing
class while preserving robustness across other classes, Li et
al. [262] propose a worst-class AT framework. This framework
includes rigorous theoretical analyses, such as a generalization
error bound for worst-class robust risk, and introduces a metric
to assess both average and worst-class accuracies. Sun et al.
[263] identify two fairness issues in AT: the varying diffi-
culty in generating adversarial examples for different classes
(source-class fairness) and the unbalanced targets of generated
adversarial examples (target-class fairness). For source-class
fairness, they generate adversarial examples near the decision
boundary, such as the first adversarial example from PGD.
To address target-class fairness, they introduce uniform dis-
tribution constraints for both the final clean sample and the
first adversarial example. To improve fairness in transferable
AT, Liu et al. [264] propose an unbalanced optimal transport

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

14

method, which utilizes data categories from the source dataset
that closely match the distribution of the target dataset.

3) Performance Trade-off: Recent studies reveal that en-
hancing adversarial robustness often compromises the predic-
tion performance for clean samples. To address this trade-off,
Wang et al. [265] introduce hyperparameters into BN layers,
enabling the adjustment of prediction focus during inference.
Mehrabi et al. [266] propose a Pareto optimal trade-off curve
for explaining AT performance, analyzing how factors such as
feature correlation, attack intensity, and network width affect
this curve. Ge et al. [267] examine the role of data types
and propose unifying various AT strategies. They demonstrate
that challenges like performance trade-offs, robust overfitting,
and catastrophic overfitting, can be alleviated by incorporating
different types of training examples.

4) Time-Efficiency: Although AT techniques effectively de-
fend against adversarial attacks, they bring considerable com-
putational overhead. To mitigate this, Shafahi et al. [206]
propose returning both weight and input gradients within each
backpropagation step. Zhang et al. [268] recalculate gradients
only for the first layer, terminating forward and backward
propagation for the remaining layers. Zheng et al. [269] reuse
adversarial examples generated in earlier epochs, as they
remain effective in later training stages. Rocamora et al. [270]
propose a local linearity regularization to avoid the compu-
tational overhead caused by the double backpropagation of
regularization terms. More recently, researchers have focused
on developing fast AT methods [271].

B. Potential Research Directions

1) Unexplored Fields: In the supplementary material, we
summary the application of AT across 100 popular deep
learning tasks. Among them, 18 areas remain unexplored
regarding the feasibility of integrating AT, including image
deblurring, object tracking, face shape modeling, optical flow,
virtual reality, environmental sound classification, motion de-
blurring, audio retrieval, 3D instance segmentation, 3D super-
resolution, 3D object tracking, 3D style transfer, speaking
style conversion, audio denoising, audio restoration, scene
graph generation, and personalized medicine. Researchers can
investigate whether AT can enhance these fields by analyzing
its potential benefits and challenges.

2) What Benefits can Catastrophic Overfitting Offer to AT?
As shown by Zhao et al. [201], catastrophic overfitting in
AT can address the performance trade-off between clean
and adversarial examples. However,
simply introducing
random noise to inputs of overfitted models fails to defend
against adaptive attacks. Therefore, researchers can develop
techniques that address both the performance trade-off and
the vulnerability of networks to adaptive attacks.

Moreover, catastrophic overfitting could be leveraged for
data copyright protection, e.g., ensuring that protected datasets
are used solely for designated tasks. Researchers could design
an adversarial dataset
induces catastrophic overfitting
when applied to non-specified tasks.

that

3) Unified Fairness Framework: Recent AT research often
focuses on individual fairness issues, such as inter-layer, inter-

class, or inter-sample robustness fairness. Moreover, adversari-
ally trained models face fairness challenges in their predictions
for the original task. Hence, a unified fairness framework can
be developed to address these concerns hierarchically, from
coarse-grained to fine-grained levels.

4) Interpretability and Model Design: Previous work typ-
ically minimizes the distributional distance between clean
and adversarial examples and shows a performance trade-off
between these two types of examples.

Assuming that each network can learn only a single dis-
tribution, the trade-off issue becomes plausible, as adversar-
ially trained models are required to learn from both clean
and adversarial distributions. Researchers can either validate
this assumption or develop models capable of learning from
both distributions. These models should automatically handle
three tasks: adversarial example detection, adversarial example
classification, and clean sample classification.

For instance, Xie et al. [184] employ separate BN layers
for clean and adversarial examples. However, this approach
is primarily analytical and challenging to implement during
inference, as it requires specifying the sample type (clean or
adversarial) to select the correct BN layer. To overcome this,
an adaptive BN plug-in can be designed to automatically select
the appropriate BN layer based on the input type.

Researchers can also construct an adversarial dataset that
closely matches the original data distribution. For example,
distribution similarity metrics like Wasserstein distance [272]
and maximum mean discrepancy [273], can be applied to
generate adversarial examples.

5) Resource-consumption Consideration: Compared

to
training, AT techniques demand higher
standard model
resources, especially when training large
computational
models on massive datasets. To address this,
integrating
fast AT with network pruning provides a potential solution.
By constructing several pruned models from the trained
large model and computing adversarial examples for these
pruned models in parallel, researchers can identify the most
aggressive adversarial example, which can then be applied to
train the large model.

V. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a comprehensive review of recent ad-
vancements in AT. We begin by illustrating the implementation
of AT techniques and their practical applications in real-world
scenarios. Next, we construct a unified algorithmic framework
for AT and categorize AT methods across three dimensions:
data enhancement, network architecture, and training config-
urations. Additionally, we summarize common challenges in
AT and identify several potential directions for future research.

REFERENCES

[1] I. Reyes-Amezcua, G. Ochoa-Ruiz, and A. Mendez-Vazquez, “En-
hancing image classification robustness through adversarial sampling
with delta data augmentation (dda),” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp.
274–283.

[2] Q. Huang, X. Dong, D. Chen, H. Zhou, W. Zhang, K. Zhang, G. Hua,
Y. Cheng, and N. Yu, “Pointcat: Contrastive adversarial training for ro-
bust point cloud recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
2024.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

15

[3] A. Hanif, M. Naseer, S. Khan, M. Shah, and F. S. Khan, “Frequency
domain adversarial training for robust volumetric medical segmenta-
tion,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, 2023, pp. 457–467.
[4] F. Wang, Z. Fu, Y. Zhang, and W. Ruan, “Self-adaptive adversarial
training for robust medical segmentation,” in International Conference
on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2023, pp. 725–735.

[5] K. H. Shibly, M. D. Hossain, H.

and
Y. Kadobayashi, “Towards autonomous driving model resistant
to
adversarial attack,” Applied Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 1, p.
2193461, 2023.

Inoue, Y. Taenaka,

[6] H. Zhu, S. Liu, and F. Jiang, “Adversarial training of lstm-ed based
anomaly detection for complex time-series in cyber-physical-social
systems,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 164, pp. 132–139, 2022.
[7] L. Lin, L. Zu, S. Fu, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, S. Suo, and C. Tong, “Inte-
grating adversarial training strategies into deep autoencoders: A novel
aeroengine anomaly detection framework,” Engineering Applications
of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 136, p. 108856, 2024.

[8] M. Zhao, L. Zhang, Y. Kong, and B. Yin, “Fast adversarial training with
smooth convergence,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 4720–4729.

[9] A. Kurakin, I. J. Goodfellow, and S. Bengio, “Adversarial examples
in the physical world,” in Artificial intelligence safety and security.
Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2018, pp. 99–112.

[10] M. Andriushchenko, F. Croce, N. Flammarion, and M. Hein, “Square
attack: a query-efficient black-box adversarial attack via random
search,” in European conference on computer vision. Springer, 2020,
pp. 484–501.

[11] F. Tramer and D. Boneh, “Adversarial training and robustness for
multiple perturbations,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 32, 2019.

[12] A. Raghunathan, S. M. Xie, F. Yang, J. C. Duchi, and P. Liang,
training can hurt generalization,” arXiv preprint

“Adversarial
arXiv:1906.06032, 2019.

[13] L. Yang, H. Qian, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, and B. Cui, “Structure-guided ad-
versarial training of diffusion models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp.
7256–7266.

[14] X. Chen, X. Gao, J. Zhao, K. Ye, and C.-Z. Xu, “Advdiffuser: Natural
adversarial example synthesis with diffusion models,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023,
pp. 4562–4572.

[15] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor, “Improved regularization of convolutional
neural networks with cutout,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017.
[16] S. Yun, D. Han, S. J. Oh, S. Chun, J. Choe, and Y. Yoo, “Cutmix:
Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable fea-
tures,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision, 2019, pp. 6023–6032.

[17] P. Esser, R. Rombach, and B. Ommer, “Taming transformers for
high-resolution image synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp.
12 873–12 883.

[18] K. A. Kinfu and R. Vidal, “Analysis and extensions of adversarial
training for video classification,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp.
3416–3425.

[19] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards
deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.06083, 2017.

[20] C. Pan, Q. Li, and X. Yao, “Adversarial initialization with universal
adversarial perturbation: A new approach to fast adversarial training,”
in Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 38, no. 19, 2024, pp. 21 501–21 509.

[21] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing

adversarial examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.

[22] Y. Cheng, J. Song, X. Zhu, Q. Zhang, L. Gao, and H. T. Shen, “Fast

gradient non-sign methods,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.12734, 2021.

[23] Z. Huang, Y. Fan, C. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Salzmann,
S. S¨usstrunk, and J. Wang, “Fast adversarial training with adaptive
step size,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 2023.

[24] E. Wong, L. Rice, and J. Z. Kolter, “Fast is better than free: Revisiting

adversarial training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.03994, 2020.

[25] X. Jia, Y. Zhang, B. Wu, K. Ma, J. Wang, and X. Cao, “Las-at: ad-
versarial training with learnable attack strategy,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2022, pp. 13 398–13 408.

[26] X. Jia, Y. Zhang, X. Wei, B. Wu, K. Ma, J. Wang, and X. Cao,
“Prior-guided adversarial initialization for fast adversarial training,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2022, pp. 567–
584.

[27] P. Kang and S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, “Understanding catastrophic
overfitting in adversarial training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02942,
2021.

[28] Z. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Meng, Z. Ying, W. Wang, M. Gu, Y. Huang et al.,
“A2: Efficient automated attacker for boosting adversarial training,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp.
22 844–22 855, 2022.

[29] H. Xu, P. He, J. Ren, Y. Wan, Z. Liu, H. Liu, and J. Tang, “Probabilistic
categorical adversarial attack and adversarial training,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 38 428–38 442.
[30] L. Yang, L. Zhang, and W. Yang, “Graph adversarial self-supervised
learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34,
pp. 14 887–14 899, 2021.

[31] F. Liu, W. Zhang, and H. Liu, “Robust spatiotemporal traffic forecasting
with reinforced dynamic adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the
29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, 2023, pp. 1417–1428.

[32] J. Zhang, Y. Huang, W. Wu, and M. R. Lyu, “Transferable adversarial
attacks on vision transformers with token gradient regularization,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 16 415–16 424.

[33] T. Karras, M. Aittala, J. Lehtinen, J. Hellsten, T. Aila, and S. Laine,
“Analyzing and improving the training dynamics of diffusion models,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 24 174–24 184.

[34] Y. Deng and T. Mu, “Understanding and improving ensemble adver-
sarial defense,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 36, 2024.

[35] J. Liu, C. P. Lau, H. Souri, S. Feizi, and R. Chellappa, “Mutual
adversarial training: Learning together is better than going alone,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 17, pp. 2364–
2377, 2022.

[36] S. Luo, D. Zhu, Z. Li, and C. Wu, “Ensemble federated adversarial

training with non-iid data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14814, 2021.

[37] G. Patel, K. R. Mopuri, and Q. Qiu, “Learning to retain while acquiring:
Combating distribution-shift in adversarial data-free knowledge distilla-
tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 7786–7794.

[38] S. Ham, J. Park, D.-J. Han, and J. Moon, “Neo-kd: knowledge-
distillation-based adversarial training for robust multi-exit neural net-
works,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36,
2024.

[39] V. Singla, S. Singla, S. Feizi, and D. Jacobs, “Low curvature activa-
tions reduce overfitting in adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp.
16 423–16 433.

[40] N. D. Singh, F. Croce, and M. Hein, “Revisiting adversarial training
for imagenet: Architectures, training and generalization across threat
models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36,
2024.

[41] C. Xie, M. Tan, B. Gong, A. Yuille, and Q. V. Le, “Smooth adversarial

training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14536, 2020.

[42] C. Xie and A. Yuille, “Intriguing properties of adversarial training at
scale,” in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
[43] C. Herrmann, K. Sargent, L. Jiang, R. Zabih, H. Chang, C. Liu,
D. Krishnan, and D. Sun, “Pyramid adversarial training improves vit
performance,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 13 419–13 429.

[44] H. Xu, X. Liu, Y. Li, A. Jain, and J. Tang, “To be robust or to be fair:
Towards fairness in adversarial training,” in International conference
on machine learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 11 492–11 501.

[45] P. Hou, J. Han, and X. Li, “Improving adversarial robustness with
self-paced hard-class pair reweighting,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 12, 2023, pp. 14 883–
14 891.

[46] J. de Jes´us Rubio, “Stability analysis of the modified levenberg–
marquardt algorithm for the artificial neural network training,” IEEE
transactions on neural networks and learning systems, vol. 32, no. 8,
pp. 3510–3524, 2020.

[47] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 1998.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

16

[48] K. Tong, C. Jiang, J. Gui, and Y. Cao, “Taxonomy driven fast adver-
sarial training,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 6, 2024, pp. 5233–5242.

[49] M. Andriushchenko and N. Flammarion, “Understanding and im-
training,” Advances in Neural Information

proving fast adversarial
Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 16 048–16 059, 2020.

[50] J. Ding, T. Bu, Z. Yu, T. Huang, and J. Liu, “Snn-rat: Robustness-
enhanced spiking neural network through regularized adversarial train-
ing,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp.
24 780–24 793, 2022.

[51] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang, “The
unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2018, pp. 586–595.

[52] B. Huang, M. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Lu, M. Cheng, and W. Wang,
“Boosting accuracy and robustness of student models via adaptive
adversarial distillation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 24 668–24 677.
[53] H. Rangwani, S. K. Aithal, M. Mishra, A. Jain, and V. B. Radhakr-
ishnan, “A closer look at smoothness in domain adversarial training,”
in International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2022, pp.
18 378–18 399.

[54] C. Song, Y. Fan, A. Zhou, B. Wu, Y. Li, Z. Li, and K. He, “Regional
training for better robust generalization,” International

adversarial
Journal of Computer Vision, pp. 1–11, 2024.

[55] B. Zi, S. Zhao, X. Ma, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Revisiting adversarial
robustness distillation: Robust soft
labels make student better,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2021, pp. 16 443–16 452.

[56] D. Wu, S.-T. Xia, and Y. Wang, “Adversarial weight perturbation
helps robust generalization,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 33, pp. 2958–2969, 2020.

[57] D. Hendrycks, S. Basart, N. Mu, S. Kadavath, F. Wang, E. Dorundo,
R. Desai, T. Zhu, S. Parajuli, M. Guo et al., “The many faces of
robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution generalization,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, 2021, pp. 8340–8349.

[58] T. Pang, X. Yang, Y. Dong, K. Xu, J. Zhu, and H. Su, “Boosting
adversarial training with hypersphere embedding,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 7779–7792, 2020.
[59] T. Li, Y. Wu, S. Chen, K. Fang, and X. Huang, “Subspace adversarial
training,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 13 409–13 418.

[60] Y. Wang, Z. Chen, D. Yang, P. Guo, K. Jiang, W. Zhang, and L. Qi,
“Out of thin air: Exploring data-free adversarial robustness distillation,”
in Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 38, no. 6, 2024, pp. 5776–5784.

[61] V. Tolpegin, S. Truex, M. E. Gursoy, and L. Liu, “Data poisoning
attacks against federated learning systems,” in Computer security–
ESORICs 2020: 25th European symposium on research in computer
security, ESORICs 2020, guildford, UK, September 14–18, 2020,
proceedings, part i 25. Springer, 2020, pp. 480–501.

[62] N. Ding and K. M¨oller, “Using adaptive learning rate to generate
adversarial images,” in Current directions in biomedical engineering,
vol. 9, no. 1. De Gruyter, 2023, pp. 359–362.

[63] L. N. Smith, “Cyclical learning rates for training neural networks,”
in 2017 IEEE winter conference on applications of computer vision
(WACV).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 464–472.

[64] L. Bottou, “Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient
descent,” in Proceedings of COMPSTAT’2010: 19th International Con-
ference on Computational StatisticsParis France, August 22-27, 2010
Keynote, Invited and Contributed Papers. Springer, 2010, pp. 177–186.
[65] M. I. Georgescu, R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu, and M. Shah,
“A background-agnostic framework with adversarial training for abnor-
mal event detection in video,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 4505–4523, 2021.
[66] M. Javanmardi and T. Tasdizen, “Domain adaptation for biomedical
image segmentation using adversarial training,” in 2018 IEEE 15th
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 554–558.

[67] C. Xie, L. Zhang, and Z. Zhong, “Virtual adversarial training-based
semisupervised specific emitter identification,” Wireless Communica-
tions and Mobile Computing, vol. 2022, no. 1, p. 6309958, 2022.
[68] S. Pan, R. Hu, S.-f. Fung, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Learning
graph embedding with adversarial training methods,” IEEE transactions
on cybernetics, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 2475–2487, 2019.

[69] J. Yang, A. A. Soltan, D. W. Eyre, Y. Yang, and D. A. Clifton, “An
adversarial training framework for mitigating algorithmic biases in
clinical machine learning,” NPJ digital medicine, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 55,
2023.

[70] J. Wang, S. Jin, W. Liu, W. Liu, C. Qian, and P. Luo, “When
human pose estimation meets robustness: Adversarial algorithms and
benchmarks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 11 855–11 864.

[71] X. Guo, Z. Huang, J. Gao, M. Shang, M. Shu, and J. Sun, “Enhancing
knowledge tracing via adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the 29th
ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2021, pp. 367–375.

[72] J. Devlin, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[73] X. Liu, H. Cheng, P. He, W. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Poon, and J. Gao,
“Adversarial training for large neural language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.08994, 2020.

[74] K. Liu, X. Liu, A. Yang, J. Liu, J. Su, S. Li, and Q. She, “A robust
adversarial training approach to machine reading comprehension,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 34,
no. 05, 2020, pp. 8392–8400.

[75] K. Lucas, S. Pai, W. Lin, L. Bauer, M. K. Reiter, and M. Sharif,
“Adversarial training for {Raw-Binary} malware classifiers,” in 32nd
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), 2023, pp. 1163–
1180.

[76] Z. Yuan, Y. Liu, H. Xu, and K. Gao, “Noise imitation based adversarial
training for robust multimodal sentiment analysis,” IEEE Transactions
on Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 529–539, 2023.

[77] F. Feng, H. Chen, X. He, J. Ding, M. Sun, and T.-S. Chua, “Enhancing
stock movement prediction with adversarial training.” in IJCAI, vol. 19,
2019, pp. 5843–5849.

[78] M. Lechner, R. Hasani, R. Grosu, D. Rus, and T. A. Henzinger,
“Adversarial training is not ready for robot learning,” in 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2021, pp. 4140–4147.

[79] Y. A. Li, C. Han, V. Raghavan, G. Mischler, and N. Mesgarani, “Styletts
text-to-speech through style diffusion and
2: Towards human-level
adversarial training with large speech language models,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.

[80] M. Kawamura, R. Yamamoto, Y. Shirahata, T. Hasumi, and
K. Tachibana, “Libritts-p: A corpus with speaking style and speaker
identity prompts for text-to-speech and style captioning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07969, 2024.

[81] V. Sehwag, S. Mahloujifar, T. Handina, S. Dai, C. Xiang, M. Chi-
ang, and P. Mittal, “Robust learning meets generative models: Can
proxy distributions improve adversarial robustness?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.09425, 2021.

[82] S. Gowal, C. Qin, J. Uesato, T. Mann, and P. Kohli, “Uncovering
the limits of adversarial training against norm-bounded adversarial
examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03593, 2020.

[83] E. Wallace, A. Williams, R. Jia, and D. Kiela, “Analyzing dynamic
adversarial training data in the limit,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08514,
2021.

[84] S. Gowal, S.-A. Rebuffi, O. Wiles, F. Stimberg, D. A. Calian, and
T. A. Mann, “Improving robustness using generated data,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 4218–4233,
2021.

[85] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic
models,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33,
pp. 6840–6851, 2020.

[86] Z. Wang, T. Pang, C. Du, M. Lin, W. Liu, and S. Yan, “Better
diffusion models further improve adversarial training,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 36 246–36 263.
[87] T. Karras, M. Aittala, T. Aila, and S. Laine, “Elucidating the design
space of diffusion-based generative models,” Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 26 565–26 577, 2022.

[88] Z. Zhong, L. Zheng, G. Kang, S. Li, and Y. Yang, “Random erasing
data augmentation,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence, vol. 34, no. 07, 2020, pp. 13 001–13 008.

[89] L. Li and M. Spratling, “Data augmentation alone can improve adver-

sarial training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.09879, 2023.

[90] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “mixup: Beyond
empirical risk minimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.
[91] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, D. Mane, V. Vasudevan, and Q. V. Le, “Au-
toaugment: Learning augmentation policies from data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.09501, 2018.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

17

[92] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, J. Shlens, and Q. V. Le, “Randaugment:
Practical automated data augmentation with a reduced search space,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition workshops, 2020, pp. 702–703.

[93] K. Hermann, T. Chen, and S. Kornblith, “The origins and prevalence
of texture bias in convolutional neural networks,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 19 000–19 015, 2020.
[94] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Ganomaly:
Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Com-
puter Vision–ACCV 2018: 14th Asian Conference on Computer Vision,
Perth, Australia, December 2–6, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Part
III 14. Springer, 2019, pp. 622–637.

[95] Z. Zuo, L. Zhao, A. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Xing,
and D. Lu, “Generative image inpainting with segmentation confusion
adversarial training and contrastive learning,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 3, 2023, pp.
3888–3896.

[96] X. Mao, Y. Chen, R. Duan, Y. Zhu, G. Qi, X. Li, R. Zhang, H. Xue
et al., “Enhance the visual representation via discrete adversarial
training,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35,
pp. 7520–7533, 2022.

[97] C. Song, K. He, J. Lin, L. Wang, and J. E. Hopcroft, “Robust local
features for improving the generalization of adversarial training,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.10147, 2019.

[98] O. Poursaeed, T. Jiang, H. Yang, S. Belongie, and S.-N. Lim, “Ro-
bustness and generalization via generative adversarial
training,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2021, pp. 15 711–15 720.

[99] T. Karras, S. Laine, and T. Aila, “A style-based generator architecture
for generative adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp.
4401–4410.

[100] X. Jia, Y. Zhang, B. Wu, J. Wang, and X. Cao, “Boosting fast
initialization,” IEEE

adversarial
Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 31, pp. 4417–4430, 2022.

training with learnable adversarial

[101] X. Jia, Y. Zhang, X. Wei, B. Wu, K. Ma, J. Wang, and X. Cao,
“Improving fast adversarial
training with prior-guided knowledge,”
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2024.
[102] Y. Dong, F. Liao, T. Pang, H. Su, J. Zhu, X. Hu, and J. Li, “Boosting
adversarial attacks with momentum,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp.
9185–9193.

[103] S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi, and P. Frossard, “Deepfool: a sim-
ple and accurate method to fool deep neural networks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2016, pp. 2574–2582.

[104] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, S. Jha, M. Fredrikson, Z. B. Celik, and
A. Swami, “The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings,” in
2016 IEEE European symposium on security and privacy (EuroS&P).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 372–387.

[105] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Towards evaluating the robustness of neural
networks,” in 2017 ieee symposium on security and privacy (sp).
Ieee,
2017, pp. 39–57.

[106] A. Shafahi, M. Najibi, Z. Xu, J. Dickerson, L. S. Davis, and T. Gold-
stein, “Universal adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, no. 04, 2020, pp. 5636–
5643.

[107] F. Croce and M. Hein, “Minimally distorted adversarial examples
with a fast adaptive boundary attack,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR, 2020, pp. 2196–2205.

[108] ——, “Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness with an ensemble
of diverse parameter free attacks,” in International conference on
machine learning. PMLR, 2020, pp. 2206–2216.

[109] A. Athalye, N. Carlini, and D. Wagner, “Obfuscated gradients give a
false sense of security: Circumventing defenses to adversarial exam-
ples,” in International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2018,
pp. 274–283.

[110] Y. Liu, Y. Cheng, L. Gao, X. Liu, Q. Zhang, and J. Song, “Practical
evaluation of adversarial robustness via adaptive auto attack,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 15 105–15 114.

[111] N. G. Marchant, B. I. Rubinstein, and S. Alfeld, “Hard to forget:
Poisoning attacks on certified machine unlearning,” in Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 7, 2022,
pp. 7691–7700.

[112] B. Liu, J. Chen, and Y. Hu, “Mode division-based anomaly detection
against integrity and availability attacks in industrial cyber-physical
systems,” Computers in Industry, vol. 137, p. 103609, 2022.

[113] Y. Zhe and J. Sakuma, “Parameter matching attack: Enhancing practical
applicability of availability attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02437,
2024.

[114] M. Zhao, B. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Kong, T. Zheng, and K. Ren, “Guided
erasable adversarial attack (geaa) toward shared data protection,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 17, pp. 2468–
2482, 2022.

[115] B. Zhao and Y. Lao, “Clpa: Clean-label poisoning availability attacks
using generative adversarial nets,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 8, 2022, pp. 9162–9170.

[116] Z. Cai, Y. Tan, and M. S. Asif, “Ensemble-based blackbox attacks
on dense prediction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2023, pp. 4045–4055.
[117] B. Chen, J. Yin, S. Chen, B. Chen, and X. Liu, “An adaptive model
ensemble adversarial attack for boosting adversarial transferability,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2023, pp. 4489–4498.

[118] A. Jha and C. K. Reddy, “Codeattack: Code-based adversarial attacks
for pre-trained programming language models,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 12, 2023, pp.
14 892–14 900.

[119] H. Liu, Z. Xu, X. Zhang, X. Xu, F. Zhang, F. Ma, H. Chen, H. Yu, and
X. Zhang, “Sspattack: a simple and sweet paradigm for black-box hard-
label textual adversarial attack,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 11, 2023, pp. 13 228–13 235.

[120] H. Peng, S. Guo, D. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Han, S. Ji, X. Yang, and
M. Zhong, “Textcheater: A query-efficient textual adversarial attack in
the hard-label setting,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3901–3916, 2024.

[121] M. Dong and C. Xu, “Adversarial robustness via random projection
filters,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 4077–4086.

[122] A. Araujo, L. Meunier, R. Pinot, and B. Negrevergne, “Robust neu-
ral networks using randomized adversarial training,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.10219, 2019.

[123] Y. Jiang, C. Liu, Z. Huang, M. Salzmann, and S. Susstrunk, “Towards
stable and efficient adversarial training against l 1 bounded adversarial
attacks,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
2023, pp. 15 089–15 104.

[124] J. H. Metzen, N. Finnie, and R. Hutmacher, “Meta adversarial training

against universal patches,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.11453, 2021.

[125] M. Ivgi and J. Berant, “Achieving model robustness through discrete
adversarial training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05062, 2021.
[126] L. Gosch, S. Geisler, D. Sturm, B. Charpentier, D. Z¨ugner, and
S. G¨unnemann, “Adversarial training for graph neural networks: Pit-
falls, solutions, and new directions,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.

[127] S. Ruan, Y. Dong, H. Su, J. Peng, N. Chen, and X. Wei, “Towards
training,” in
viewpoint-invariant visual recognition via adversarial
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2023, pp. 4709–4719.

[128] Y. Gao, D. Wu, J. Zhang, G. Gan, S.-T. Xia, G. Niu, and M. Sugiyama,
“On the effectiveness of adversarial training against backdoor attacks,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2023.
[129] H. Zhang, H. Chen, Z. Song, D. Boning, I. S. Dhillon, and C.-J. Hsieh,
“The limitations of adversarial training and the blind-spot attack,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1901.04684, 2019.

[130] L. Tao, L. Feng, J. Yi, S.-J. Huang, and S. Chen, “Better safe than sorry:
Preventing delusive adversaries with adversarial training,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 16 209–16 225,
2021.

[131] L. Tao, L. Feng, H. Wei, J. Yi, S.-J. Huang, and S. Chen, “Can
adversarial training be manipulated by non-robust features?” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 26 504–26 518,
2022.

[132] M. Yu, S. Sahraei, S. Li, S. Avestimehr, S. Kannan, and P. Viswanath,
“Coded merkle tree: Solving data availability attacks in blockchains,”
in International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data
Security. Springer, 2020, pp. 114–134.

[133] D. Yu, H. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Yin, and T.-Y. Liu, “Availability attacks
create shortcuts,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2367–2376.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

18

[134] Y. Dong, Z. Deng, T. Pang, J. Zhu, and H. Su, “Adversarial dis-
training for robust deep learning,” Advances in Neural

tributional
Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 8270–8283, 2020.
[135] L. Hsiung, Y.-Y. Tsai, P.-Y. Chen, and T.-Y. Ho, “Towards com-
positional adversarial robustness: Generalizing adversarial training to
composite semantic perturbations,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp.
24 658–24 667.

[136] J. Weng, Z. Luo, Z. Zhong, D. Lin, and S. Li, “Exploring non-target
knowledge for improving ensemble universal adversarial attacks,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37,
no. 3, 2023, pp. 2768–2775.

[137] D. Wang, C. Gong, and Q. Liu, “Improving neural language modeling
training,” in International Conference on Machine

via adversarial
Learning. PMLR, 2019, pp. 6555–6565.

[138] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “Deepwalk: Online learning
of social representations,” in Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining,
2014, pp. 701–710.

[139] Q. Dai, X. Shen, L. Zhang, Q. Li, and D. Wang, “Adversarial training
methods for network embedding,” in The world wide web conference,
2019, pp. 329–339.

[140] J. Zhao and W. Mao, “Generative adversarial training with perturbed
token detection for model robustness,” in Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
2023, pp. 13 012–13 025.

[141] C. Liu, M. Salzmann, T. Lin, R. Tomioka, and S. S¨usstrunk, “On
the loss landscape of adversarial training: Identifying challenges and
how to overcome them,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 33, pp. 21 476–21 487, 2020.

[142] H. Kim, W. Lee, and J. Lee, “Understanding catastrophic overfitting
in single-step adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 9, 2021, pp. 8119–8127.
[143] S. Yang and C. Xu, “One size does not fit all: Data-adaptive adversarial
Springer,

training,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
2022, pp. 70–85.

[144] J. Zhang, X. Xu, B. Han, G. Niu, L. Cui, M. Sugiyama, and M. Kankan-
halli, “Attacks which do not kill training make adversarial learning
stronger,” in International conference on machine learning.
PMLR,
2020, pp. 11 278–11 287.

[145] Y. Wang, X. Ma, J. Bailey, J. Yi, B. Zhou, and Q. Gu, “On the
convergence and robustness of adversarial training,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.08304, 2021.

[146] A. Shaeiri, R. Nobahari, and M. H. Rohban, “Towards deep
to large perturbations,” arXiv preprint

learning models resistant
arXiv:2003.13370, 2020.

[147] L. Shi and W. Liu, “A closer look at curriculum adversarial training:
From an online perspective,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 13, 2024, pp. 14 973–14 981.

[148] B. Li, S. Wang, S. Jana, and L. Carin, “Towards understanding fast
adversarial training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03089, 2020.
[149] C. Gong, T. Ren, M. Ye, and Q. Liu, “Maxup: Lightweight adversarial
training with data augmentation improves neural network training,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 2474–2483.

[150] Y. Liang, Y. Sun, R. Zheng, and F. Huang, “Efficient adversar-
ial training without attacking: Worst-case-aware robust reinforcement
learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35,
pp. 22 547–22 561, 2022.

[151] P. de Jorge Aranda, A. Bibi, R. Volpi, A. Sanyal, P. Torr, G. Rogez,
and P. Dokania, “Make some noise: Reliable and efficient single-
step adversarial training,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 35, pp. 12 881–12 893, 2022.

[152] Y. Xiong and C.-J. Hsieh, “Improved adversarial training via learned
optimizer,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Confer-
ence, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part VIII 16.
Springer, 2020, pp. 85–100.

[153] N. Ye, Q. Li, X. Zhou, and Z. Zhu, “An annealing mechanism
for adversarial training acceleration,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems, 2021.

[154] J. Y. Yoo and Y. Qi, “Towards improving adversarial training of nlp

models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00544, 2021.

[156] H. Salman, A. Ilyas, L. Engstrom, A. Kapoor, and A. Madry, “Do
adversarially robust imagenet models transfer better?” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 3533–3545, 2020.
[157] Z. Liu, H. Mao, C.-Y. Wu, C. Feichtenhofer, T. Darrell, and S. Xie, “A
convnet for the 2020s,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 11 976–11 986.
[158] H. Touvron, M. Cord, M. Douze, F. Massa, A. Sablayrolles, and
H. J´egou, “Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation
through attention,” in International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2021, pp. 10 347–10 357.

[159] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, vol. 25, 2012.

[160] T. Xiao, M. Singh, E. Mintun, T. Darrell, P. Doll´ar, and R. Girshick,
“Early convolutions help transformers see better,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 34, pp. 30 392–30 400, 2021.

[161] Y. Mo, D. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Guo, and Y. Wang, “When adversarial
training meets vision transformers: Recipes from training to architec-
ture,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp.
18 599–18 611, 2022.

[162] S. Y. Gadre, G. Ilharco, A. Fang, J. Hayase, G. Smyrnis, T. Nguyen,
R. Marten, M. Wortsman, D. Ghosh, J. Zhang et al., “Datacomp: In
search of the next generation of multimodal datasets,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.

[163] Y. Bai, J. Mei, A. L. Yuille, and C. Xie, “Are transformers more
robust than cnns?” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 34, pp. 26 831–26 843, 2021.

[164] E. Debenedetti, V. Sehwag, and P. Mittal, “A light recipe to train
robust vision transformers,” in 2023 IEEE Conference on Secure and
Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 225–253.
[165] S. Peng, W. Xu, C. Cornelius, K. Li, R. Duggal, D. H. Chau, and
J. Martin, “Robarch: Designing robust architectures against adversarial
attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03110, 2023.

[166] S.-A. Rebuffi, F. Croce, and S. Gowal, “Revisiting adapters with
adversarial training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04886, 2022.
[167] C. Liu, Y. Dong, W. Xiang, X. Yang, H. Su, J. Zhu, Y. Chen, Y. He,
H. Xue, and S. Zheng, “A comprehensive study on robustness of image
classification models: Benchmarking and rethinking,” International
Journal of Computer Vision, pp. 1–23, 2024.

[168] Z. Wang, X. Li, H. Zhu, and C. Xie, “Revisiting adversarial training
at scale,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 24 675–24 685.

[169] F. Feng, X. He, J. Tang, and T.-S. Chua, “Graph adversarial training:
Dynamically regularizing based on graph structure,” IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2493–2504,
2019.

[170] J. X. Morris, E. Lifland, J. Y. Yoo, J. Grigsby, D. Jin, and Y. Qi,
“Textattack: A framework for adversarial attacks, data augmentation,
training in nlp,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05909,
and adversarial
2020.

[171] D. Ziegler, S. Nix, L. Chan, T. Bauman, P. Schmidt-Nielsen, T. Lin,
A. Scherlis, N. Nabeshima, B. Weinstein-Raun, D. de Haas et al.,
“Adversarial training for high-stakes reliability,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 9274–9286, 2022.
[172] L. Pan, C.-W. Hang, A. Sil, and S. Potdar, “Improved text classifica-
tion via contrastive adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 10, 2022, pp. 11 130–
11 138.

[173] H. Chen and Y. Ji, “Adversarial training for improving model robust-
ness? look at both prediction and interpretation,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 10, 2022, pp.
10 463–10 472.

[174] Z. Gan, Y.-C. Chen, L. Li, C. Zhu, Y. Cheng, and J. Liu, “Large-scale
adversarial training for vision-and-language representation learning,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 6616–
6628, 2020.

[175] L. Li, H. Guan, J. Qiu, and M. Spratling, “One prompt word is enough
to boost adversarial robustness for pre-trained vision-language models,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 24 408–24 419.

[176] Y. Wu, S. Wang, G. Song, and Q. Huang, “Augmented adversarial
training for cross-modal retrieval,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia,
vol. 23, pp. 559–571, 2020.

[155] H. M. Dolatabadi, S. Erfani, and C. Leckie, “ℓ-∞-robustness and
beyond: Unleashing efficient adversarial training,” in European Con-
ference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2022, pp. 467–483.

[177] C. Li, S. Gao, C. Deng, D. Xie, and W. Liu, “Cross-modal learning
with adversarial samples,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 32, 2019.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

19

[178] C. Sheng, M. Pietik¨ainen, Q. Tian, and L. Liu, “Cross-modal self-
supervised learning for lip reading: When contrastive learning meets
adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM International
Conference on Multimedia, 2021, pp. 2456–2464.

[179] B. Vivek, K. R. Mopuri, and R. V. Babu, “Gray-box adversarial
training,” in Proceedings of the European conference on computer
vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 203–218.

[180] C. Dugas, Y. Bengio, F. B´elisle, C. Nadeau, and R. Garcia, “Incor-
porating second-order functional knowledge for better option pricing,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 13, 2000.

[181] P. Ramachandran, B. Zoph, and Q. V. Le, “Searching for activation

functions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05941, 2017.

[182] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “Gaussian error linear units (gelus),”

arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.

[183] D.-A. Clevert, T. Unterthiner, and S. Hochreiter, “Fast and accu-
rate deep network learning by exponential linear units (elus),” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.07289, 2015.

[184] C. Xie and A. Yuille, “Intriguing properties of adversarial training at

scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03787, 2019.

[185] S. Addepalli, S. Jain et al., “Efficient and effective augmentation
training,” Advances in Neural Information

strategy for adversarial
Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 1488–1501, 2022.

[186] Z. Liu, Y. Xu, X. Ji, and A. B. Chan, “Twins: A fine-tuning framework
for improved transferability of adversarial robustness and generaliza-
tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 16 436–16 446.

[187] H. Wang, A. Zhang, S. Zheng, X. Shi, M. Li, and Z. Wang, “Remov-
ing batch normalization boosts adversarial training,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 23 433–23 445.
[188] B. Wu, J. Gu, Z. Li, D. Cai, X. He, and W. Liu, “Towards efficient
adversarial training on vision transformers,” in European Conference
on Computer Vision. Springer, 2022, pp. 307–325.

[189] B. Vivek and R. V. Babu, “Single-step adversarial training with dropout
scheduling,” in 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 947–956.

[190] S. Huang, Z. Lu, K. Deb, and V. N. Boddeti, “Revisiting residual
networks for adversarial robustness,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp.
8202–8211.

[191] H. Zhang, Y. Yu, J. Jiao, E. Xing, L. El Ghaoui, and M. Jordan,
“Theoretically principled trade-off between robustness and accuracy,”
in International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2019, pp.
7472–7482.

[192] J. Wang and H. Zhang, “Bilateral adversarial training: Towards fast
training of more robust models against adversarial attacks,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision,
2019, pp. 6629–6638.

[193] G. Sriramanan, S. Addepalli, A. Baburaj et al., “Towards efficient
and effective adversarial training,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 11 821–11 833, 2021.

[194] J. Cui, S. Liu, L. Wang, and J. Jia, “Learnable boundary guided
adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
conference on computer vision, 2021, pp. 15 721–15 730.

[195] K. Kireev, M. Andriushchenko, and N. Flammarion, “On the ef-
fectiveness of adversarial training against common corruptions,” in
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. PMLR, 2022, pp. 1012–1021.
[196] J. Dong, S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, J. Lai, and X. Xie, “The enemy of
my enemy is my friend: Exploring inverse adversaries for improving
adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 24 678–24 687.

[197] J. Fan and W. Li, “Adversarial training and provable robustness: A tale
of two objectives,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 8, 2021, pp. 7367–7376.

[198] H. Zhang and J. Wang, “Defense against adversarial attacks using
feature scattering-based adversarial training,” Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.

[199] D. Zou, S. Frei, and Q. Gu, “Provable robustness of adversarial training
for learning halfspaces with noise,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 13 002–13 011.

[200] S. Addepalli, S. Jain, G. Sriramanan, and R. Venkatesh Babu, “Scaling
adversarial training to large perturbation bounds,” in European Con-
ference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2022, pp. 301–316.

[201] M. Zhao, L. Zhang, Y. Kong, and B. Yin, “Catastrophic overfitting: A
potential blessing in disguise,” in European Conference on Computer
Vision. Springer, 2024.

[202] S. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Peng, and L. Bai, “Learning more robust features

with adversarial training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07757, 2018.

[203] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images,” Technical Report, University of Toronto, Tech. Rep.,
2009.

[204] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016.

[205] L. Rice, E. Wong, and Z. Kolter, “Overfitting in adversarially robust
deep learning,” in International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 8093–8104.

[206] A. Shafahi, M. Najibi, M. A. Ghiasi, Z. Xu, J. Dickerson, C. Studer,
L. S. Davis, G. Taylor, and T. Goldstein, “Adversarial training for free!”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.

[207] G. Sriramanan, S. Addepalli, A. Baburaj et al., “Guided adversarial
attack for evaluating and enhancing adversarial defenses,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 20 297–20 308,
2020.

[208] Z. Wang, H. Wang, C. Tian, and Y. Jin, “Preventing catastrophic over-
fitting in fast adversarial training: A bi-level optimization perspective,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12443, 2024.

[209] G. Zizzo, A. Rawat, M. Sinn, and B. Buesser, “Fat: Federated adversar-
ial training,” in Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2020.

[210] G. Zizzo, A. Rawat, M. Sinn, S. Maffeis, and C. Hankin, “Certified
federated adversarial training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10525, 2021.
[211] C. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Ma, and L. Lyu, “Calfat: Calibrated federated ad-
versarial training with label skewness,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 3569–3581, 2022.

[212] J. Zhang, B. Li, C. Chen, L. Lyu, S. Wu, S. Ding, and C. Wu, “Delving
into the adversarial robustness of federated learning,” in Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 9, 2023,
pp. 11 245–11 253.

[213] T. Miyato, S.-i. Maeda, M. Koyama, and S. Ishii, “Virtual adversarial
training: a regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised
learning,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelli-
gence, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 1979–1993, 2018.

[214] D. Kim, Y. Choi, and Y. Kim, “Understanding and improving virtual
adversarial training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06737, 2019.
[215] Z. Dai, Z. Yang, F. Yang, W. W. Cohen, and R. R. Salakhutdinov,
“Good semi-supervised learning that requires a bad gan,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.

[216] G. Osada, B. Ahsan, R. P. Bora, and T. Nishide, “Regularization with
latent space virtual adversarial training,” in Computer Vision–ECCV
2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
Proceedings, Part I 16. Springer, 2020, pp. 565–581.

[217] L. Chen, W. Ruan, X. Liu, and J. Lu, “Seqvat: Virtual adversarial
training for semi-supervised sequence labeling,” in Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2020, pp. 8801–8811.

[218] L. Li and X. Qiu, “Token-aware virtual adversarial training in natural
language understanding,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 9, 2021, pp. 8410–8418.

[219] D.-M. Lee, Y. Kim, and C.-g. Seo, “Context-based virtual adversar-
ial training for text classification with noisy labels,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.11851, 2022.

[220] E. Abad Rocamora, F. Liu, G. Chrysos, P. M. Olmos, and V. Cevher,
“Efficient local linearity regularization to overcome catastrophic over-
fitting,” in 12th International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR 2024), 2024.

[221] R. Lin, C. Yu, B. Han, and T. Liu, “On the over-memorization
during natural, robust and catastrophic overfitting,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

[222] Z. Golgooni, M. Saberi, M. Eskandar, and M. H. Rohban, “Zerograd:
Mitigating and explaining catastrophic overfitting in fgsm adversarial
training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15476, 2021.

[223] R. Lin, C. Yu, B. Han, H. Su, and T. Liu, “Layer-aware analysis of
catastrophic overfitting: Revealing the pseudo-robust shortcut depen-
dency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16262, 2024.

[224] R. Lin, C. Yu, and T. Liu, “Eliminating catastrophic overfitting via
abnormal adversarial examples regularization,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.

[225] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE transactions
on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935–
2947, 2017.

[226] K. Zhu, X. Hu, J. Wang, X. Xie, and G. Yang, “Improving gen-
eralization of adversarial training via robust critical fine-tuning,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2023, pp. 4424–4434.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

20

[227] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
survey,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 129, no. 6, pp.
1789–1819, 2021.

[228] J. H. Cho and B. Hariharan, “On the efficacy of knowledge distillation,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, 2019, pp. 4794–4802.

[229] W. Park, D. Kim, Y. Lu, and M. Cho, “Relational knowledge distilla-
tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 3967–3976.

[230] A. Shafahi, P. Saadatpanah, C. Zhu, A. Ghiasi, C. Studer, D. Jacobs, and
T. Goldstein, “Adversarially robust transfer learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.08232, 2019.

[231] M. Goldblum, L. Fowl, S. Feizi, and T. Goldstein, “Adversarially
robust distillation,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence, vol. 34, no. 04, 2020, pp. 3996–4003.

[232] J. Maroto, G. Ortiz-Jim´enez, and P. Frossard, “On the benefits
of knowledge distillation for adversarial robustness,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.07159, 2022.

[233] H. Kuang, H. Liu, Y. Wu, S. Satoh, and R. Ji, “Improving adversarial
robustness via information bottleneck distillation,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.

[234] Q.-Z. Cai, M. Du, C. Liu, and D. Song, “Curriculum adversarial

training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04807, 2018.

[235] Y. Ganin, E. Ustinova, H. Ajakan, P. Germain, H. Larochelle, F. Lavi-
olette, M. March, and V. Lempitsky, “Domain-adversarial training of
neural networks,” Journal of machine learning research, vol. 17, no. 59,
pp. 1–35, 2016.

[236] H. Liu, M. Long, J. Wang, and M. Jordan, “Transferable adversarial
training: A general approach to adapting deep classifiers,” in Interna-
tional conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2019, pp. 4013–4022.
[237] C. Yu, B. Han, M. Gong, L. Shen, S. Ge, B. Du, and T. Liu,
“Robust weight perturbation for adversarial training,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.14826, 2022.

[238] J. Chen, X. Lin, H. Xiong, Y. Wu, H. Zheng, and Q. Xuan, “Smoothing
adversarial training for gnn,” IEEE Transactions on Computational
Social Systems, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 618–629, 2020.

[239] Z. Li, D. Yu, L. Wei, C. Jin, Y. Zhang, and S. Chan, “Soften to defend:
Towards adversarial robustness via self-guided label refinement,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 24 776–24 785.

[240] Y. Dong, K. Xu, X. Yang, T. Pang, Z. Deng, H. Su, and J. Zhu,
training,” arXiv preprint

“Exploring memorization in adversarial
arXiv:2106.01606, 2021.

[241] D. Zhou, N. Wang, B. Han, and T. Liu, “Modeling adversarial noise
training,” in International Conference on Machine

for adversarial
Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 27 353–27 366.

[242] D. Stutz, M. Hein, and B. Schiele, “Confidence-calibrated adversarial
training: Generalizing to unseen attacks,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2020, pp. 9155–9166.

[243] Y. Xing, Q. Song, and G. Cheng, “On the algorithmic stability
of adversarial training,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 34, pp. 26 523–26 535, 2021.

[244] S. Sankaranarayanan, A. Jain, R. Chellappa, and S. N. Lim, “Regular-
izing deep networks using efficient layerwise adversarial training,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 32,
no. 1, 2018.

[245] G. Y. Park and S. W. Lee, “Reliably fast adversarial training via latent
adversarial perturbation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF interna-
tional conference on computer vision, 2021, pp. 7758–7767.

[246] G. Jin, X. Yi, D. Wu, R. Mu, and X. Huang, “Randomized adver-
sarial training via taylor expansion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp.
16 447–16 457.

[247] A. Brock, S. De, and S. L. Smith, “Characterizing signal propagation
to close the performance gap in unnormalized resnets,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.08692, 2021.

[248] F. Croce, S.-A. Rebuffi, E. Shelhamer, and S. Gowal, “Seasoning model
soups for robustness to adversarial and natural distribution shifts,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 12 313–12 323.

[249] Q. Tian, K. Kuang, K. Jiang, F. Wu, and Y. Wang, “Analysis and appli-
cations of class-wise robustness in adversarial training,” in Proceedings
of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery &
Data Mining, 2021, pp. 1561–1570.

[250] J. Duchi, E. Hazan, and Y. Singer, “Adaptive subgradient methods
for online learning and stochastic optimization.” Journal of machine
learning research, vol. 12, no. 7, 2011.

[251] T. Tieleman and G. Hinton, “Divide the gradient by a running aver-
age of its recent magnitude. coursera: Neural networks for machine
learning,” Technical report, 2017.

[252] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”

arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

[253] Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, P. Khanduri, M. Hong, S. Chang, and S. Liu,
“Revisiting and advancing fast adversarial training through the lens
of bi-level optimization,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 26 693–26 712.

[254] H. Wang and Y. Wang, “Self-ensemble adversarial training for im-

proved robustness,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09678, 2022.

[255] D. Acuna, M. T. Law, G. Zhang, and S. Fidler, “Domain adversarial
training: A game perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05352, 2022.
[256] G. Jin, X. Yi, W. Huang, S. Schewe, and X. Huang, “Enhancing
adversarial training with second-order statistics of weights,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2022, pp. 15 273–15 283.

[257] Y. Bengio, “Practical recommendations for gradient-based training of
deep architectures,” in Neural networks: Tricks of the trade: Second
edition. Springer, 2012, pp. 437–478.

[258] C. Szegedy, S. Ioffe, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Alemi, “Inception-v4,
inception-resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 31,
no. 1, 2017.

[259] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with

warm restarts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03983, 2016.

[260] T. Tsiligkaridis and J. Roberts, “Understanding and increasing ef-
ficiency of frank-wolfe adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2022, pp. 50–59.

[261] Z. He, T. Li, S. Chen, and X. Huang, “Investigating catastrophic
overfitting in fast adversarial training: a self-fitting perspective,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 2314–2321.

[262] B. Li and W. Liu, “Wat: improve the worst-class robustness in adver-
sarial training,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence, vol. 37, no. 12, 2023, pp. 14 982–14 990.

[263] C. Sun, C. Xu, C. Yao, S. Liang, Y. Wu, D. Liang, X. Liu, and
A. Liu, “Improving robust fariness via balance adversarial training,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37,
no. 12, 2023, pp. 15 161–15 169.

[264] Z. Liu, Y. Xu, Y. Xu, Q. Qian, H. Li, X. Ji, A. Chan, and R. Jin,
“Improved fine-tuning by better leveraging pre-training data,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 32 568–32 581,
2022.

[265] H. Wang, T. Chen, S. Gui, T. Hu, J. Liu, and Z. Wang, “Once-for-all
adversarial training: In-situ tradeoff between robustness and accuracy
for free,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33,
pp. 7449–7461, 2020.

[266] M. Mehrabi, A. Javanmard, R. A. Rossi, A. Rao, and T. Mai,
training,” in
PMLR, 2021, pp.

“Fundamental
International Conference on Machine Learning.
7544–7554.

tradeoffs in distributionally adversarial

[267] Y. Ge, Y. Li, K. Han, J. Zhu, and X. Long, “Advancing example
exploitation can alleviate critical challenges in adversarial training,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2023, pp. 145–154.

[268] D. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Lu, Z. Zhu, and B. Dong, “You only prop-
agate once: Accelerating adversarial training via maximal principle,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.

[269] H. Zheng, Z. Zhang, J. Gu, H. Lee, and A. Prakash, “Efficient
adversarial training with transferable adversarial examples,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2020, pp. 1181–1190.

[270] E. A. Rocamora, F. Liu, G. G. Chrysos, P. M. Olmos, and V. Cevher,
“Efficient local linearity regularization to overcome catastrophic over-
fitting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11618, 2024.

[271] X. Jia, J. Li, J. Gu, Y. Bai, and X. Cao, “Fast propagation is better: Ac-
celerating single-step adversarial training via sampling subnetworks,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2024.
[272] V. M. Panaretos and Y. Zemel, “Statistical aspects of wasserstein
distances,” Annual review of statistics and its application, vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 405–431, 2019.

[273] A. J. Smola, A. Gretton, and K. Borgwardt, “Maximum mean discrep-
ancy,” in 13th international conference, ICONIP, 2006, pp. 3–6.


